X. 1. People are for the most part unaware of the origin of certain terms. Consequently we have included a number in this work for their informational value.
Certain terms for human beings (De quibusdam vocabulis hominum) Although the origin of terms, whence they come, has received some accounting by philosophers - such that by derivation 'human being' (homo) is so called from 'humanity' (humanitas), or 'wise person' (sapiens) from 'wisdom' (sapientia), because wisdom comes first, then the wise person - nev- ertheless a different, special cause is manifest in the ori- gin of certain terms, such as homo from 'soil' (humus), from which the word homo properly is so called. From such derivations, as examples, we have set forth a num- ber in this work.
A. 2. Aeros (i.e. heros, "demi-god, hero"), a strong and wise man. Author (auctor), so called from 'augment- ing' (augere); moreover, auctor cannot be used in the feminine gender - for there are some terms that cannot be inflected in the feminine, such as 'runner' (cursor). Agent (actor), from acting (agere). 3. Foster-son (alum- nus), so called from fostering (alere), although both he who fosters and he who is fostered can be called alumnus - that is, he who nourishes and he who is
nourished - but still, the better use is for one who is nourished. 4. Friend (amicus), by derivation as if from the phrase 'guardian of the spirit' (animi custos). 5. And amicus is appropriately derived; the term for someone tormented by carnal desire is amator turpitudinis ("lover of wickedness"), but amicus is from 'hook' (hamus), that is, from the chain of charity, whence also hooks are things that hold. Lovable (amabilis), too, because one is worthy of love (amor).A lover (amasius), because he is prone to love (amor). 6. Clever (astutus) is so called from the word 'cleverness' (astus), which is the term for a shrewd and wary person who can do something forcefully without danger. Smart (argutus), because one quickly comes up with an argument (argumentum) while speaking. Acute (acer), in every manner lively and forceful. Swift (alacer), with regard to speed and running, as if one would say 'winged' (aliger). 'Bearing arms' (armiger), because he 'bears arms' (arma gerere). Happy (alacris), "joyful"; cheerful (alacer), lively and disturbed by no surpris- ing events. Agile (agilis), from doing (agere) something quickly, like docilis ("easily taught').
7. Rivalling (aemulus), striving for the same thing as an imitator (imitator) and lover (amabilis) of it; at other times it comes to mean "inimical." Fair (aequus), mean- ing "naturally just," from 'equity' (aequitas), that is, after the idea of what is equal (aequus) - whence likewise 'equity' is so called after a certain equalness (aequali- tate). Aequaevus refers to what is of an equal age (aequale aevum) with another thing, that is, coeval (coaetaneus). Arrogant (arrogans), because much is demanded (rog- are), and such a person is disdainful. Presumptuous (audax) may properly be substituted for arrogans. Spir- ited (animosus), because one is full of spirit (animus) and drive. Stouthearted (animatus), as if 'endowed with vigor' (animo auctus), firm in spirit. 8. Puffed up (aela- tus, i.e. elatus, ppl. of efferre), because one exalts (elevare) himself beyond his proper measure when he seems to himself a great person for what he accomplishes. Self- aggrandizing (attollens), because one exalts and elevates himself. Ambitious (ambitiosus), because one solicits
(ambire) honors. 9. Greedy (avidus) is so called from 'crave' (avere), for to crave is to desire; from this verb also comes 'covetous' (avarus). Now, what is it to be greedy? To pass beyond what is sufficient. The covetous person is so called because he is greedy for gold, and never has enough money, and the more he has, the more he covets. On this, with the same idea, is Horace, who says (Epistles 1.2.56):
The covetous person (avarus) is always in need.
And Sallust (War Against Catiline 11.3): "Because avarice (avaritia) is diminished neither by wealth nor by poverty."
10. Bitter (amarus) draws its name from the taste, for such a one is not sweet-tempered, and does not know how with any sweetness to invite anyone to share his company. Adulterous (adulter), a violator of marital chastity, because he defiles the bed of another person.
11. Indecisive (anceps), wavering this way and that and doubting whether to choose this or that, and distressed (anxius) about which way to lean. Abominable (atrox), because one has loathsome (taeter) conduct. Abstemious (abstemius), from temetum, that is, 'wine,' as if abstain- ing (abstinere) from wine. [Neighboring (affinis) . . .] Weaned (ablactatus), because one is 'withdrawn from milk' (a lacte ablatus). 12. Sick (aeger), because one is pressed (agere) by illness or grief for a time, and sickly (aegrotus), because one is sick rather often - there is the same distinction as between 'angry' (iratus) and 'given to anger' (iracundus). Miserable (aerumnosus) is so called from gullet (rumen), because one who has become a wretch from poverty hungers and thirsts. 13. A diviner (auspex), because he examines the auspices (auspicium; cf. specere, "look at") of birds, in the same way that a fowler (auceps) is so called because he 'catches birds' (aves capere). Star-crossed (astrosus), so called from star (astrum), as one born under an evil star. 14. Enormous (aenormis, i.e. enormis), because one exceeds the norm (norma) and moderation. A rustler (abactor) is a thief of beasts of burden and livestock; commonly people call him an abigeius, from 'drive off' (abigere). 15. 'Dressed for mourning' (atratus) and 'clothed in white' (albatus): the former from black clothing (cf. ater, "black"), the lat- ter from white (albus) clothing. Stranger (advena), one who 'comes here' (advenire) from elsewhere. Foreigner (alienigena), because one is of a 'foreign nation' (alienum genus), and not of the nation where one now is. [Again,]
alienigena, one who is begotten (genitus) from another people (alia gens), and not from the people where one now is.
16. Immigrant (accola), because immigrating (advenire) one tills (colere) the land. Farmer (agri- cola), from 'tilling a field' (colere + ager); likewise silvicola ("inhabitant of the woods"; cf. silva, "woods"). Hanger-on (assecula), because one follows (sequi, ppl. secutus) someone for money. 17. Tax-payer (assiduus) was the term among the ancients for one who had to contribute a payment to the public treasury in money
(as, gen. assis), and also was busy with public affairs - hence also it should be written with an s, not with a d (i.e. not adsiduus). 18. An attendant (apparator) is so called because one appears (apparere) and is seen and is in attendance at someone's pleasure. Attentive (attentus), as one holds onto (tenere) what one hears.
19. Thunderstruck (attonitus), as if fired with a certain madness and stupefied, called 'thunderstruck' from the crash of thunderclaps (tonitrus), as if stupefied by a thunderclap and close to a nearby lightning strike. 20. An allectus (i.e. a public official), because such a one is publicly elected (electus). 'Driven from office' (abactus), because one is removed from 'from public employment' (ab actus). Aborted (abortivus), because one is not born, but miscarried (aboriri, ppl. abortus) and perishes. Adoptive (adoptivus), because one is publicly chosen (optare) as a son. 21. Both (ambo), derived from ?µ??Y ("both"), a Greek word made into Latin with the third letter (i.e. phi) changed. 'Another' (alius) [is said of one from many, but] 'the other' (alter) [of one from two]. Ambidextrous (aequimanus) is the term for one who holds a sword in either hand (manus).
B. 22. Blessed (beatus) is so called as if the term were 'well endowed' (bene auctus), specifically from having what one wants and not suffering what one doesn't want. Further, a person is indeed blessed who both has all the good things that he wants, and wishes for nothing wickedly. From these two, a person is made blessed. 23. Good (bonus) is thought to be so called from beauty (venustas) of the body, and later the word was trans- ferred to the spirit. We call a person good if evil does not have the upper hand in him, and we call that per- son best (optimus, superlative of bonus) who sins least.
24. A gracious (benignus) person is willingly prepared 'to do good' (benefacere) and is kind in speech. Not
much distinguishes benignus from bonus, because the benignus person also seems disposed to do well. How- ever, they differ in this, that the bonus person can be rather somber, and although he does well and is atten- tive to what is demanded of him, still he does not know how to be pleasant as a companion, whereas the benignus person knows how to be inviting to all with his sweet nature. 25. Beneficent (beneficus), so called from 'doing well' (benefacere) to another; from this also is the term 'beneficence' (beneficentia), which benefits one's neigh- bor. 26. Benevolent (benivolus), because one 'wishes well' (bene velle, 1st person volo). Still, we do not say benevo- lus, any more than malevolus, for often a word com- pounded of two bases alters either the first letter (i.e. of the second base) or the last letter (i.e. of the first base) - for benevolentia (i.e. rather than benivolentia, "benevo- lence") has a disagreeable sound. 27. Charming (blan- dus), sweet and open to friendship. 28. Stupid (brutus), as if overwhelmed (obrutus), because one lacks sense, for such a one is without reason or prudence. From this term also came the name Junius Brutus, the son of the sister of Tarquinius Superbus. When he feared the same disaster that befell his brother, who was killed by his maternal uncle because of his wealth and prudence, he feigned a useful stupidity for a time. Whence he received the cognomen Brutus, although he was named Junius.
29. [Red (burrus) . . .] Stammering (balbus), so called from bleating (balare) rather than speaking, for such a person cannot get words out. 30. Hence also 'hesitat- ing in speech' (blaesus), because one breaks off words. A chatterer (bucco), a garrulous person, because he out- does others in the loquacity of his speech, not its sense. Bilious (biliosus), because one is always in a melancholy state, from the black humor that is called bile (bilis).
31. Baburrus, "stupid, inept." Biothanatus (i.e. a martyr who dies a violent death), because he is 'twice dead,' for death is 9?vatoç in Greek. 
C. 32. Bright (clarus), from sky (caelum), because it shines, and hence also the term 'bright day' for the shin- ing of the sky. Lofty (celsus) is named after sky, because one is elevated and high, as if the term were 'celestial' (caelestis). 33. Chaste (castus) was first so called after the term 'castration' (castratio); afterwards the ancients
chose so to call those who would promise perpetual abstinence from sexual intercourse. 34. A 'celestial one' (caeles) is so called because such a one directs his course to thesky(caelum). Celibate (caelebs), one having no part in marriage, of which kind are the numinous beings in heaven (caelum), who have no spouses - and caelebs is so called as if the term were 'blessed in heaven' (caelo bea- tus). Heavenly-dweller (caelicola), because they 'dwell in heaven' (caelum colere) - for that is an angel. 35. 'Con- tinent' is said not only of chastity, but also of food and drink, and also of anger, agitation of mind, and pas- sion for disparaging. A person is continent (continens) because he 'holds himself back' (abstinere) from many evils. 36. Merciful (clemens), having pity, because such a one 'is called upon' (cluere), that is, he protects and guards, as a patron does for his client (cliens). 37. Con- cordant (concors) is so called from 'joining of the heart' (coniunctio cordis), for as one who shares one's lot (sors) is called a 'partner' (consors), so one who is joined in heart (cor) is called concors. 38. Haranguer (contiona- tor).  Consoler (consolator), 'comforting interlocutor';
and a consoler is so called because he focuses attention on the single (solus) person to whom he is speaking, and alleviates his solitude by talking with him. Hence also the word 'solace' (solacium).
39. Well-advised (consultus) is one who has 'taken counsel' (consulere); the opposite is ill-advised, one who does not accept counsel. 40. Constant (constans) is so called because one 'stands firm' (stare, present participle stans) in every situation, and cannot deviate in any direction. Trusting (confidens), one full of faith (fiducia) in all matters. Whence Caecilius (fr. 246):
If you summon Confidence, confide (confidere) everything to her.
41. Cautious (cautus), so called from 'being wary' (cavere). Sly (callidus), "deceptive," because he knows how to conceal (celare) things, and is skillful in a bad way. However, the ancients would use callidus not only for "cunning," but also for "expertly taught." Such a one is also wily (versutum), because he quickly shifts (vertere) his thinking around. 42. Desirous (cupidus), so called from taking (capere), that is, receiving, much. Clamorous (clamosus), as if the word were calamosus, from 'reed-pipe' (calamus) - thus, because one makes noise. A calumniator (calumniator), a false accuser of a crime, so called from 'intriguing against' (calvere), that
is, misleading and deceiving. 43. Accountant (calculator), from 'pebbles' (calculi), that is, little stones; the ancients, holding these in their hands, would calculate numbers.
44. A plagiarist (compilator), one who mixes the words of another with his own, as pigment-makers customarily crush together diverse things mixed up in a mortar (pila). The poet of Mantua (i.e. Vergil) was once accused of this crime because of his taking some verses of Homer and mixing them with his own, and was called by his rivals a plagiarist of the ancients. He answered them, "It takes great strength to wrest Hercules's club from his hand."
45. Insolent (contumax), because one scorns (con- temnere). Chromaticus, because one is not confused nor does he change color, for 'color' in Greek is yp?µa. 46. Abusive (contumeliosus), because one is quick and swells (tumere) with insulting words. Head- strong (contentiosus), so called from purposefulness (intentio), one who claims something not according to reason, but from obstinacy alone. 47. Contemptible (con- temptibilis), either because 'worthy of contempt' (con- temptui habilis), or because disdained (contemptus) and base (vilis), that is, without honor. 48. Cruel (crudelis), that is, raw (crudus), which the Greeks call ?µóç ("raw"), witha transferred sense as if uncooked and not suitable for eating, for such a one is harsh and hard-hearted. 49. Executioner (carnifex), because he 'makes dead meat' (carnem afficere). Gallows-bird (cruciarius), because he deserves the cross (crux, gen. crucis). Colleague (collega), so called from the bond (colligatio) of fellowship and from the embrace of friendship. Contemporary (coaeta- neus), as if the term were 'of equal age' (compar aetatis).
50. Accomplice (complex, gen. complicis), because one has been connected (applicatus) with another person in a single sin or crime for an evil purpose - but if done for a good purpose we never use the word complex. 51. Partner (consors), because a share of property belongs to him, for the ancients would use the word 'allotment' (sors) for 'share.' Therefore consors, because one is 'shar- ing in the allotment' (communis sorte), just as dissors means 'unequal in the allotment' (dissimilis sorte).
52. Swift (celer) is so called from swiftness (celeritas), because such a one quickly does what needs to be done. 'Closely connected' (confinalis), because one is nearby (affinis) in family or in location. Farmer (colonus), so called from farm (colonia) or from tilling (colere)a field.
53. Attorney (cognitor) from knowing (cognoscere)a case.
Curator (i.e. a high municipal official), because he takes
care (cura) of minor children who are still not old enough to be able to administer their affairs. Clients (cliens, "dependent on a patron") were earlier called colientes, from 'cultivating' (colere) their patrons. 54. [Captured (captus).. .] Captive (captivus) is so called as if 'deprived of civic rights' (capite deminutus), for the condition of a free person has passed from him, whence he is spo- ken of as deprived of civic rights by legal experts. 55. Unimpaired (colomis, i.e. columis), so called from pillar (column), because such a one is erect and very firm. 56. Adorned (comtus), so called from hair (coma), because one's hair is good-looking, or because one grooms one's hair. 57. Curly-haired (calamistratus), from the 'curling iron' (calamister), that is, the iron pin made in the shape of a reed (calamus), on which hair is twisted to make it curly. Those who curl hair will warm these irons in embers in order to be curly-haired.
58. Stout (corpulentus), because one is weighty of body (corpus) and sluggish with flesh. Fat (crassus), from stuff- ing of the body, from 'making' (creare) flesh. Glutton (comesor), from eating (comedere, ppl. comesum) a lot, for such a one is immoderately dedicated to the maw and belly. Taverner (caupo)- the worst sort make water from wine. 59. Candidus ["honest, splendid"]. Gray-haired (canus), so called from white (candidus), and 'white' as if the term were 'added whiteness' (candor datus) - for the whiteness called candor results from effort, and a naturally white thing is called albus. 60. Curly-haired (crispus) . . . Lame (clodus) . . . Bent (curvus) . . . Blind (caecus) is so called because one 'lacks vision' (carere visum), for he has lost his eyes. One is caecus who does not see with either eye. 61. Epileptic (caducus, "falling sickness"), so called from falling down (cadere). Simi- larly a lunatic (lunaticus) because [he suffers at a partic- ular phase of the moon (luna)]. Confounded (confusus), so called from one's confession (confessio) of a wicked deed; hence also 'confounding' (confusio).
62. Ruined (convulsus) is said of one whose pos- sessions are carried off by some force. Whence also a wrecked (convulsus) ship, whose projecting parts are car- ried off by the force of a storm, as in Vergil (Aen. 1.383):
Scarcely seven (ships), wrecked (convulsus) by the waves -
as if mutilated. 63. Consumed (consumptus), wholly 'used up' (sumere) and devoured. Procuress (concilia- trix), so called from her making a companionship in a shameful agreement (consensio), because she acts as go-between and traffics in someone else's body. Such a woman is also called a pimp (leno). 64. Circumforanus, one who strolls 'around marketplaces' (circum fora) and courts for the sake of lawyering. Guildsman (collegia- tus) . . . Coachman (carpentarius) . . . 
D. 65. Master (dominus) is so called by derivation, because he presides over a household (domus). Well- spoken (disertus), "learned," so called from discuss (dis- sere, ppl. dissertus), for he discusses things methodically. Learned (doctus), from speak (dicere), whence also dic- tor ("speaker"). 66. Docile (docilis), not that one is doc- tus, but that he is able to be taught (docere), for he is clever and apt for learning. Student (discipulus) is so called from instruction (disciplina), and disciplina is so called from learn (discere). 67. Steward (dispensator) is the name for a person entrusted with the administration of money, and such a one is a dispensator because in for- mer times the person who dispensed money would not count it but 'weigh it out' (appendere). 68. Rich (dives), so called from money (cf. divitiae, "wealth"). Seemly (decorus), "perfect," from the number ten (decem, i.e. the perfect number). [Sweet (dulcis).. .] Becoming (decens), "well-arranged," so called from the number ten (decem). From 'ten' also come 'seemly' and 'fitting' (decibilis). 69. Straightforward (directus), because one goes straight (in rectum). Beloved (dilectus), from 'caring for' (diligentia); both are marks of loving (diligere). 70. 'Thickly smeared' (delibutus), anointed with oil as is the custom for ath- letes or youths in the wrestling arena. Hence (Terence, Phormio 856), "Anointed (delibutus) with joy," that is, suffused with or full of joy. Over-indulged (delicatus), because one is fed with luxury (deliciae), living in feasts and daintiness of body.
71. Exhausted (defessus), "always feeble," as if the term were 'tired for a long time' (diu fessus). Infirm (debilis), because one is made weak by bile (bilis), for bile is a humor that affects the body. Pale (decolor), because color (color) is lacking in someone. 72. Desperate (desperatus) is the common term for "bad" and "lost" and "with- out any hope (spes) of success"; it is likewise said of sick people who are weakened and given up as hopeless (sine spe). It was the custom among the ancients to set those
desperately ill in front of their doors, either to give up their last breath to the earth or to be able to be cured, perhaps, by passers-by who at some time had suffered with a similar disease. 73. Base (degener), or "ignoble," either because one is of an inferior lineage or because, although born of the best lineage, one lives dishonor- ably. 74. Decrepit (decrepitus), because one is rather close to death, as if he were turning toward the darkness of death, as toward the twilight (crepusculum) time of night. Others say a decrepit person is not one who is borne away by old age, but one who has already left off chatter- ing (crepare), that is, has ceased speaking. 75. Worthless (depretiatus), because one is base and not of any value (pretium). Dire (dirus), "very mean" and "horrible," as if driven that way 'by divine wrath' (divina ira), for a dire condition means that which is brought on by divine wrath. In another sense dirus means "great." 76. Gaping (dehiscens), "yawning (hiscere) very much," for here the prefix de- is augmentative, as (Terence, Self-Tormentor 825), "I 'very much love' (deamare) you, Syrus." Despis- ing (despiciens), because one 'looks down' (deorsum aspicere) on someone, or holds one incontempt. Guileful (dolosus), "deceptive" or "malicious," because he 'prac- tices guile' (deludere), for to deceive someone he col- ors his hidden malice with charming words. 77. Doubt- ful (dubius), "uncertain," as if in 'two directions' (duae viae). Accuser (delator), so called because one discloses (detegere) what was hidden (latere). A 'dilatory per- son' (dilator), because one delays (differre, ppl. dilatus) action. Indolent (desidiosus), "sluggish, lazy," so called from 'settling down' (desidere), that is, from sitting too much. Similarly, the term 'inactive ones' (resides; singu- lar reses) is from 'remain seated' (resideo)- for the prefix de- here is augmentative. 78. Doting (delerus, i.e. delirus), demented from old age, after the term 2?p?±v ("prattle"), or because one wanders from straight thinking as if from the lira - for a lira (i.e. the balk between furrows) is a kind of plowed land when farmers, at the time of sowing, make straight furrows in which the whole crop is set. 79. Demented (demens), the same as one who is amens, that is, without mind (mens), or suffering a loss of mental power. Doting (desipiens), because one begins to under- stand (sapere) less than one used to. 80. Condemned (damnatus) and condemnable (damnabilis): of these the former has already been sentenced, the latter can be sen- tenced. Glutton (degulator), because he is dedicated to the maw (gula).
E. 81. Eloquent (eloquens), "profuse in speech (elo- quium)." Exertus, "ready in speaking," because exerere (ppl. exertus) means "bring out" or "set forth clearly." Erudite (eruditus), because not uncultivated (rudis), but already educated. 82. Expert (expertus), much skilled (peritus), for here the prefix ex- means "very much." However, 'lacking experience' (expers), one who is with- out 'practical knowledge' (peritia) and understanding. 'Decked out' (exornatus), "very ornate (ornatus)," for the prefix ex- means "very," as in 'noble' (excelsus), as if 'very lofty (celsus),' and 'excellent' (eximius), as if 'very prominent (eminens).' 83. Efficacious (efficax), so called because one has no difficulty in doing (facere) any kind of thing. Hence also effective (efficiens), so called from 'accomplishing' (facere). Hopeless (exspes), because one is without hope (spes). Destitute (expers), because 'with- out a share (pars),' for such a one lacks a share. Deprived (exsors), because one is 'without an allotment (sors).' 84. Exile (exul), because one is 'outside his native soil' (extra solumsuum), as if sent beyond his soil, or wandering out- side his soil, for those who go outside their soil are said to 'be in exile' (exulare).
85. Banished (extorris), because one is 'outside his own land' (extra terram suam), as if the term were exterris - but properly speaking one is banished when driven out by force and ejected from his native soil with terror (terror). Also extorris, driven 'from one's own land' (ex terra sua). 86. Banished (extorris), 'outside the land' (extra terram), or 'beyond one's frontier' (extra terminos suos), because one is frightened (exterrere). 87. Expeller (exterminator), not the one who is commonly said ???a- vto9?vat ("to be destroyed"), but the one who casts out and expels someone from the boundaries (termi- nus) of a city. Expelled (exterminatus), because such a one is driven out 'beyond his boundaries' (extra ter- minos). [Thus also] foreign (externus), because one is from an alien land (terra). 88. Needy (egens) and des- titute (egenus), "indigent (indigens)," without a nation (gens) and without a family (genus). [Egenus . . .] 'Poor' (exiguus), very needy (egens), for the prefix ex- means "very." Lank (exilis), "thin," because one can 'go out' (exire) of a place even if it is narrow. 89. Emaciated (exe- sus), because one is 'entirely eaten away' (percomedere, ppl. percomesus), for such a one is withered, thin, lank. Drained(exhaustus), because one is consumed and made empty (cf. haurio, ppl. haustus, "drain"). Feeble (exsan- guis), because such a one is without blood (sanguis).
90. Lifeless (exanimis) means "dead" (cf. anima, "soul, life"). Further, we say exanimis or exanimus, as we say unanimus or unanimis ("of one mind"), and inermus or inermis ("unarmed"), and this is a matter of our whim.
91. 'Burnt up' (exustus) is said of one of whom nothing remains, as if it were 'very burned' (ustus), for the pre- fix ex- means "very." Hateful (exosus) is so called from hatred (odium), for the ancients would say both odi ("I hate") and osus sum ("I hate"; an alternative older form of the verb), and from this is exosus, which we use even though we no longer say osus. Destructive (exitiosus), because one is a cause of destruction (exitio) to many.
Executor (i.e. an official who summoned to court and enforced the court's mandate), from 'carry out' (exequi, ppl. executus); the same person is an exactor ("superin- tendent, tax-gatherer"). 92. Burglar (effractor), because such a one is a breaker (cf. frangere, ppl. fractus, "break") of locks. Fierce (efferatus), 'affected with a savage (feri- nus) spirit' and passing beyond the nature of humans. Unrestrained (effrenatus), because such a one is impul- sive and headlong and without the rein (frenum) of rea- son. 93. Eunuchus is a Greek term (i.e. ?ùvouyoç) mean- ing "eunuch" (spado). Although some of these have sex- ual intercourse there is no strength in their seed, for they possess and emit a fluid but it is useless and impotent for begetting. 94. A 'worn out' (effeta) woman, because she is exhausted from frequent childbearing (fetus), for incessant parturition makes her weak.
F. 95. Fluent (facundus), because one can speak easily (facilis). Merry (facetus), one who devotes himself to jokes and games in gestures and actions (factum), so called from 'act' (facere). Frugal (frugalis) is so called from crops (frux, gen. frugis), that is, from profit (fructus) and parsimony, or, as others would have it, from moder- ation and temperance. 96. Money-lender (fenerator, i.e. faenerator), one who entrusts money to a debtor, as if 'the handler of interest (faenus),' for faenus is money. A fenerator in Latin is also one who gives and receives loans. Flamines (singular flamen) are the high priests of idols.
97. Happy (felix) is one who gives happiness (felicitas), happy, one who receives it, and happy the thing by which happiness is given, as a 'happy time,' a 'happy place.' 98. Trustworthy (fidelis), because the good such a person
says or promises 'is done' (fieri, 3rd person fit) by him. Willing (facilis, lit. "easy"), from 'doing' (facere), and not sluggish. Sturdy (firmus), from whence also the word formosus ("good-looking"). Brave (fortis), because one bears (ferre, 3rd person fert) adversity or whatever hap- pens - or, from 'iron' (ferrum), because one is tough and not softened. 99. Good-looking (formosus) is so called from appearance (forma); the ancients used formus for 'warm' and 'heated,' for heating arouses blood, [and] blood arouses beauty.
100. Foul (foedus) takes its name from goats and kids (haedus, also spelled aedus), with the letter f added. The ancients would use this with a serious connotation, as (Vergil, Aen. 2.502):
Defiling (foedare) with his blood the fires that he himself had consecrated.
Fragile (fragilis) is so called because it can easily be bro- ken (frangere). 101. Weary (fessus), as if 'split' (fissus), and no longer whole in health - and that is the general sense, for we say 'weary in spirit' - as (Vergil, Aen. 8.232):
Weary (fessus) he sinks back three times into the valley -
and 'weary in body,' which is the more proper sense, and 'weary of circumstances,' with respect to the out- come of coming events. Harassed (fatigatus), as if 'tossed by the fates' (fatis agitatus). 102. Fearful (formidolosus), so called from formum ("warm thing"), that is, blood, because, when fleeing from the skin and the heart, the blood contracts - for fear congeals the blood, which when concentrated produces terror (formido), whence is the verse (Vergil, Aen. 3.30):
And my chilled blood coagulates with terror (formido).
Although a formidolosus person is fearful, it also means "fearsome." 103.A fool (fatuus) is thought to be so called because he understands neither what he says (fari, 3rd person fatur) himself nor what others say. Some think that the term 'fool' derives originally from admirers of Fatua, the prophesying wife of Faunus, and that they were first called fatuus because they were immoderately stupefied by her prophecies, to the point of madness.
104. Patron (fautor), because one 'gives favor' (favere) and consent. Fashioner (fictor), so called from fashion- ing (fingere, ppl. fictus) and arranging something, as one who smoothes, treats, anoints, and brightens women's hair. Liar (fallax), one who deceives by speaking (fari),
that is, by his talk. 105. Hot-headed (fervidus), "prone to anger," for wrath inflames such a one. 'Gnashing one's teeth' (frendens), because in a threatening way one crushes (frangere) and clenches his teeth. Growling (fre- mens)... Ferocious (ferox), because one engages in wild- ness (feritas), as a beast. 106. Thief (fur) is so called from 'dark' (furvus), that is, 'dusky,' for such a one practices at night. Factious (factiosus), in its bad sense, when we mean for it to be taken as "seditious," but otherwise when we mean "popular," and "powerful" and as if "of grand conduct (factio)." 107. Criminal (facinorosus), so called from the commission of a particular deed, for he does (facere) what harms (nocere) another. [Womanizer (femellarius), one devoted to women, whom the ancients called mulierarius.] Debauched (flagitiosus), because one frequently solicits (flagitare) and desires sensual pleasure. 108. Rascal (furcifer) was once the term for one who, because of a petty offense, was forced to 'carry a fork-shaped yoke' (furcam ferre) along the road, more to shame the man than as a cause of torment, and to announce his sin, and warn others not to sin in like man- ner. 109. Worthless (futilis; lit. "leaky"), "vain, useless, a chatterbox"; the term has a transferred sense from 'pot- tery (fictilis) vessels' that are empty and leaky and don't hold what you put into them. 110. Fornicator (fornicar- ius) . . . Prostitute (fornicatrix), a woman whose body is public and common. Such bodies would lie prostrate underarches, places thattheycall fornices - hence also the term 'female fornicator' (fornicaria). Vergil (Aen. 6.631:
And with the archway (fornix) opposite.
111. A 'fertile woman'(fecunda) is so called from offspring (fetus), as if the word were fetunda, for she frequently bears children. Pregnant (feta) . . . Weeping (flens), as if shedding (fluere, present participle fluens) tears. Fugitive (fugitivus): nobody is correctly so called except one who flees (fugere, 3rd person fugit) froma master, for if a little boy runs away from his nurse or from school he is not a fugitivus.
G. 112. Glorious (gloriosus), so called from an abundance of distinction (claritas), with the letter g exchanged for c. Gloriosus is so called from the laurel wreath (laurea) that is given to victors. Knowledgeable (gnarus), "knowing"; its opposite is ignorant (ignarus), "not knowing." Grave (gravis, lit. "heavy"), "venerable." Whence we also call contemptible people lightweight (levis). A person is
called grave for his good counsel and steadfastness, because he does not hop about with a light motion, but stands firm with a fixed gravity (gravitas) of con- stancy. 113. [Great (grandis) . . . Slender (gracilis) . . .] Aged (grandaevus), because one is 'great in age' (grandis aevo). Kindly (gratus), because one maintains kindness (gratia) - but 'kindly' is said only with regard to the mind, whereas 'most pleasing' (gratissimus) is said with regard to both the mind and the body. Obliging (gratifi- cus), because one 'freely does' (gratis facere)a good deed. Generous (gratiosus), because he gives someone more than one deserves. 114. Garrulous (garrulus) is the proper word for a person who is commonly called verbose (ver- bosus). When happiness befalls such people they neither can nor will be quiet. The term is taken from the bird called jackdaw (graculus), which constantly chatters with importunate loquacity and is never quiet. A debauchee (ganeo), "voluptuary," though in hidden and subter- ranean places that the Greeks call y?v?ta (cf. ganea, "disreputable chophouse"). Glutton (glutto), from maw (gula), that is, a gluttonous person (gulosus).
H. 115. Humble (humilis), as if inclined to the ground (humus). Honorable (honorabilis), as if the term were 'suitable for honors' (honore habilis), that is, 'fit.' 116. Decent (honestus), because such a one has no part of wickedness - for what is decency (honestas) but per- petual honor, that is, as if the term were 'the condition of honor' (honoris status)? Humane (humanus), because such a one has love and feelings of sympathy for humans (homines). Hence also derives the term 'human kind- ness' (humanitas), because of which we watch over one another. 117. Capable (habilis), because such a one is suitable and fit for handling (habere) something. Bur- dened (honerosus, i.e. onerosus, in classical Latin "bur- densome") is more than honeratus ("burdened"), just as scelerosus ("vicious") is more than sceleratus ("tainted with wickedness"). Hirsute (hirsutus), because such a one is hairy (hirtus) and shaggy with hair.
118. Hypocrite (hypocrita) from the Greek (i.e. úpomptt?ç, "play-actor, dissembler") is translated into Latin as "dissembler" (simulator). Such a one outwardly appears as good, while he is evil within, for úpo- means "false" and mp(c)otç means "judgment." 119. Moreover, the name of hypocrita derives from the appearance of those who go in theatrical spectacles with countenance con- cealed, marking their face with blue and red and other
pigments, holding masks of linen and plaster of Paris decorated with various colors, sometimes also smear- ing their necks and hands with white clay, in order to arrive at the coloring of the character they portray and to deceive the public while they act in plays. Now they look like a man, now a woman, now a man with barbered hair, now with long, now a woman with an old crone's, a maiden's, or some other appearance, with age and sex varied, to deceive the people while they act in plays. 120. The sense of this theatrical hypocritical appearance has been transferred to those who proceed with a false face and pretend to be what they are not. They cannot be called hypocrites from the moment they reveal them- selves outwardly. 121. Interred (humatus), because one is covered with soil (humus), that is, buried.
I. 122. Talented (ingeniosus), one who has the power within (intus) of producing (gignere, ppl. genitus) any sort of art. Discoverer (inventor), because he 'comes upon' (invenire) what he is searching for. Hence also the thing called an invention (inventio). If we reconsider the origin of the word, what else does it sound like if not that 'to invent' (invenire) is to 'come upon' (in + venire) that which is sought for? 123. Translator (inter- pres), because he is the medium 'between the sides' (inter partes) of two languages when he translates. But the per- son who interprets (interpretari) God is also called an interpreter for the humans to whom he reveals divine mysteries [because he mediates 'between' (inter) that which he translates]. 124. Judge (iuridicus) [because he 'tells the ordinances' (iura dicere) of the laws]. Poten- tial (indoles) in the proper sense is a certain image of future strength. A righteous (iustus) person is so called because he keeps the laws (ius) and lives according to the law. 125. Innocent (innox), because such a one does not harm (nocere); innocuus, one who has not been harmed - but among the ancients there is no difference between the senses of the words. Cheerful (ilaris, i.e. hilaris) is a Greek word (i.e. ¬2apóç, "cheerful"). 'Given to merri- ment' (iocundus), because such a one is always ready for jokes (iocus) and merry-making - from the frequentative element (i.e. -cund-), as is iracundus ("given to wrath"; cf. ira, "wrath"). Jesting (iocosus), making jokes (iocus).
126. Renowned (inclitus) is a Greek term, for the
Greeks call 'glorious' m2Utóç. Illustrious (inlustris) is a term for fame, because a person shines in many ways because of the splendor of his family or wisdom or
strength; the opposite of an illustrious person is one of obscure birth. [Suitable (idoneus) . . .] 127. Hale (incolumis) has its name from column (columna), as if upright, strong, and stable. Unfading (immarcescibilis), uncorrupted and eternal, because it is without decay (marcor) and faintness. Undefiled (intemeratus), uncor- rupted and violated by no audacity (temeritas). 128. Fee- ble (infirmus), because without 'good looks' (forma). Weak (imbecillus), as if the term were 'without a walking- stick (baculum),' fragile and unsteady. Empty (inanis), trifling. Fickle (inconstans), because such a one is not stable (stabilis), but what pleases him in turn displeases him. 129. One is boasting (iactans) or arrogant because he is not satisfied with the institutions of his elders but seeks his own individual way of righteousness and sanc- tity. Wrathful (iracundus) is so called because such a one is driven into a fury by inflamed blood, for ur  means "flame," and wrath (ira) inflames. 130. Instigator (incen- tor), because sucha one kindles (incendere) and inflames. An instigator because such a one fires (succendere) the hearts of other people to vice by his wicked suggestions, and inflames them by persuasion. 131. Unforgivable (inexpiabilis), because such a one is never forgiven (expi- are), and would never be exculpated. 'Not praisewor- thy' (inlaudabilis), not because one has not been praised (laudare), but because one has not deserved to be praised. Irate (iratus), driven by anger (ira).
132. Impious (impius), because one iswithoutthe piety (pietas) of religion. Unjust (iniquus) in the strict sense is so called because one is not even-handed (aequus), but is unfair (inequalis). However, between impious and unjust there is sometimes a difference, in that all impious persons are unjust, but not all the unjust are impious. Thus impious means "not of the faith," and such a one is called impious because he is a stranger to the piety of religion. On the other hand, an unjust person is so called because he is not fair but is stained with wicked works - and this is the case [if] he were to be appraised in the name of Christianity. 133. Enemy (inimicus), because not a friend (amicus), but an adversary. Now two things make an enemy: deceit and terror. Terror, because they are afraid; deceit, because they have suffered evil. 134. Envi- ous (invidus), so called from gazing (cf. videre, "see")
at the happiness of another person. Enviable (invidio- sus) is a person who suffers the envy of another. Hated (invisus), "odious," so called from envy (invidia) and jealousy. 135. 'Unable to testify' (intestabilis), one whose testimony (testimonium) is worthless, and what he says would be null and void. Infamous (infamis), not of good repute (fama). Relentless (improbus), so called because he presses hard upon one who is refusing (prohibere).
136. Importunate (importunus), "restless," because such a one has no harbor (portus), that is, place of rest - hence importunate people are quickly driven into shipwreck, as it were. Unbridled (infrenis), that is, one who is not controlled by a bridle (frenum), as (Vergil, Aen. 4.41):
The unbridled (infrenus) Numidians.
137. Gnashing (infrendens) properly speaking is grind- ing the teeth against each other. Also grind (fren- dere) means to crush (frangere) with the teeth - hence infants not yet having teeth are called nefrendes. Glut- tonous (ingluviosus), so called from the maw (gula) and voracity (voracitas). 138. Inglorious (ingloriosus), because one is without glory (gloria), that is, without tri- umphs. Again, inglorius, "not remembered with glory." Unshapely (informis), "huge," not that such a one has no proper shape (forma), but that he has a great size beyond the shapely. 139. 'Hardened crook' (inveterator), because he has much experience 'of long standing' (vetus, gen. veteris) in evildoing. Horrible (immanis), because not good, but cruel [and] terrible, for manus means "good." Hence also by antiphrasis the gods called Manes, in no way good. 140. Immunis, "not at all generous (munifi- cus)," as in the old proverb, "One's fellow-citizens hate 'anyone who gives nothing' (immunis)." Again, immu- nis, one who does not fulfill his duties (munia), that is, perform his official function, for he is devoid of any spe- cial claim. 141. Indemnified (indemnis), because one lives without a penalty (damnum), and without any blame or danger. Unskilled (iners), "without a craft (ars)," and for this reason useless for any work. Unarmed (inermis), either "without weapons (arma)" or "without strength," for the term 'weapons' [is taken] in a general way to refer to strength. 142. Listless (ignavus), "ignorant of the way" (ignarus viae), that is, the way of reason and life. Ignorant (ignarus), "not knowing (gnarus)," that is, unknowing, that is, without a nose (nares), for the ancients called knowing "sniffing out." Moreover, ignarus means two
things: either one who 'knows not' (ignorare), or one who is not known. Ignarus, one who knows not.
143. Unmindful (immemor), one who has forgotten, for such a one has lost his memory (memoria). Unknow- ing (inscius), because one is without knowledge (scien- tia). Naive (idiota), "an inexperienced person"; the word is Greek (cf. "6tÛt?ç, "private person, ordinary person"). Inexperienced (imperitus), "without experience (peri- tia)." 144. Ill-advised (inconsultus), because such a one does not take counsel (consilium). Ill-advised, because without counsel and unaware of things and ignorant. Unsuitable (ineptus), the opposite of suitable (aptus) and as if the word were inaptus. 145. Poor (inops), one who is without land, for we understand that land is wealth (ops), because it brings wealth by being fruitful. Others under- stand inops to mean "not entombed, unburied," one for whom no empty burial mound has been raised for when he dies. 146. Ignoble (ignobilis), because such a one is low-born (ignotus) and base (vilis) and of an obscure family, whose very name is not known. Goatish (irco- sus, i.e. hircosus), because one stinks with the fetid sweat of his body. Low-born (ignotus), ignoble (ignobilis), or arriving unexpectedly. 147. Unexpected (improvisus), so called because one is suddenly present, and not 'seen far before' (porro ante visus). Informer (index), a betrayer, from 'pointing out' (indicare). Indigenous (indigena), so called because one is 'from there begotten' (inde genitus), that is, born in the same place. 148. Shameless (impu- dens), because shame (pudor) and modesty (pudicitia) are far from such a one. Shameless (impudicus), so called from 'anus' (podex), for putor means a stench. Incestu- ous (incestus), so called from illicit intercourse - as if the word were incastus ("not chaste") - as one who defiles a holy virgin or someone closely related to himself.
149. Internicida is one who bears false witness and by it kills (occidere) a person. Infitiator, "one who denies," because he does not confess (fateri) but strives against the truth witha lie. [Impostor (impostor).. .] 150. Interceptor (in classical Latin, "usurper"), properly speaking is the name for one of two (inter duos) rivals who is removed from public life. 151. Insidious (insidiosus), because such a one 'lies in ambush' (insidiare), for properly speaking insidere (lit. "to occupy") is to await someone guilefully. Hence also ambush (insidiae) has its name. Enceinte (incincta), that is, without a girdle (cinctus), because the enlarged womb does not permit a pregnant woman to be tightly girded. 152. Unmarried (investis), that is, 'without
a garment (vestis),' for such a one does not yet have a stola, the garment that is the sign of the marriage of a maiden. Parasite (iscurra, i.e. scurra), so called because such a one attends on someone for the sake of food (esca).
K. 153. Katholicus, "universal," a Greek term (i.e. ma9o2tmóç). Dear (karus) is a Greek term (cf. y?ptç, "kindness"), as is caritas ("charity") also, whence also caristia ("annual family dinner").
L. 154. Distinguished (luculentus), because bright (cf. lux, gen. lucis, "light") in speech and splendid in one's words. Reader (lector) is so called from reading (legere, ppl. lectus), that is, 'running over' (i.e. a text), whence a ship is said to 'run by' (legere) whatever it passes. Thus legere, "pass by, go by," as (cf. Vergil, Aen. 3.127):
We pass by (legere) straits made rough by many lands.
Again, lector, from 'gathering' (colligere, ppl. collectus) with one's mind what one reads, as if the term were collector - as in this verse (Vergil, Ecl. 3.92):
You who gather (legere) flowers.
155. Prating (loquax), not an eloquent (eloquens) per- son. Copious (laetus, lit. "happy"), from amplitude (lat- itudo). 'Rich in lands' (locuples), as if the term were 'full of estate property' (locis plenus) and the owner of many properties, as Cicero teaches in the Second Book of his Republic (16): "And with a great production of sheep and cattle, because then their business was in livestock and the possession of places (locus), for which reason they were called wealthy (pecuniosus) and 'rich in lands' (locuples)." 156. Generous (liberalis), so called because one gives freely (libenter) and doesn't grumble. Bounti- ful (largus) . . . Tall (longus), so called from line (linea), because such a person is stretched out. Long-lived (lon- gaevus), as if 'of a long age' (longum aevum) and for a long time.
157. Long-suffering (longanimis), or great-spirited (magnanimis; cf. animus, "spirit"), because such a one is disturbed by no passion but suffers all things to be endured. The opposite of this is pusillanimous (pusilla- nimis), petty and not steadfast in any trial. Of this sort it is written (cf. Proverbs 14:17): "The pusillanimous man, extremely foolish." 158. Light-minded (levis), so called from the inconstancy of one's wavering, because with a light (levis) movement of the mind one desires now this,
now that. Slippery (lubricus), because one slips (labi). Gliding (labens) sometimes means "swift," as (Vergil, Aen. 11.588):
Glide down (labi), nymph, from the sky,
and (Vergil, Aen. 4.223):
Glide down (labi) on your wings.
For a gliding down is faster than running. 159. Bandit (latro), a waylayer, so called from 'hiding' (latere). Aelius (i.e. Aelius Stilo, fragment) says, "A latro is a latero - from the word 'to hide' (latere)-a waylayer." Lanista, "gladi- ator," that is, an executioner, so called from the Etruscan language, from 'tear in pieces' (laniare), with regard to bodies. 160. Provoker (lacessitor), so called with trans- ferred sense from dogs or wild beasts that provoke by 'lacerating' (lacerare). Pimp (leno), an arranger of lewd practice, because he charms the minds of wretched peo- ple and seduces them by cajoling (delinire, i.e. delenire). Libidinous (libidinosus), because one does what 'is pleas- ing' (libet). Libidinous from (the god) Liber, who is [depicted with the body] of a girl. Voluptuous (luxu- riosus), as if dissolute (solutus) with pleasure (voluptas); whence also limbs moved from their places are called luxus ("dislocated"). Lascivious (lascivus), because such a one is loose (laxus), that is, dissolute and vain.
161. Panic-stricken (lymphaticus), because one fears water (cf. lympha, "water"), one whom the Greeks call ú6po??óßoç ("hydrophobic"). In the strict sense lym- phaticus is the word for one who contracts a disease from water, making him run about hither and thither, or from the disease gotten from a flow of water. But poets now have taken over this term for 'madmen.' 162. [Sluggish (languidus)...] Wan (luridus), because such a one is pal- lid, so called from 'leather strip' (lorum), because one's skin looks like this. Leprous (leprosus), so called from the excessive itching (pruritus) of mange, whence it should be written witha p. 163. One-eyed (luscus), one who sees the light (lux, gen. lucis) only partly, and similarly dim- sighted (luscitiosus), one who cannot see in the evening.
The ancients called a one-eyed person cocles, whence we read of the Cyclopes called Coclites, because they are thought to have had a single eye. Washed (lotus, the ppl. of lavare, "wash"), the same as lautus, that is, clean. Lupa (lit. "she-wolf"), a prostitute, so called from her rapa- ciousness, because she seizes wretched people for herself and takes possession of them.
M. 164. The term 'pitying' (misericors) is assigned from one's having compassion for another's distress (miseria), and from this pity (misericordia) is so called, because it makes miserable (miserum) the heart (cor) of one who grieves over the distress of another. However, this etymology does not apply in every case, because in God there is misericordia without any 'misery of heart' (cordis miseria). 165. Glorified (mactus), 'more advanced' (magis auctus) in glory. The word is taken from sac- rificial rites, for whenever incense or wine would be poured on a victim they would say, "This bull is mac- tus by wine or incense," that is, the offering is per- fected and more advanced. 166. One is called munificent (munificus) either because he gives a lot of gifts (munus) to someone, or because he fulfills his duty (munus), that is, the service that he owes. Thus also 'performing service' (munifex), because one undertakes duties. 167. Magnanimous (magnanimis), because one has a 'great spirit' (magnus animus) and great virtue. Its opposite is pusillanimous (pusillanimis). Magnificent (magnifi- cus), a term derived from 'doing great things' (magna facere). 168. Docile (mansuetus), "mild" or "tamed," as if 'accustomed to the hand' (manu assuetus). Moderate (modestus), so called from measure (modus) and tem- perance (temperies), doing something neither too much nor too little. Mild (mitis), "gentle and docile," yielding to wickedness and silently enduring injustice, as if the term were mutus ("mute"). 169. Mute (mutus), because the sound one makes is not words but a lowing (mugi- tus), for such a one sends the breath of his voice through his nostrils, in a kind of lowing. Memor, one who keeps something in memory, or one who is kept in memory.
170. Master (magister, also meaning "teacher"), "greater in station" (maior in statione), for steron in Greek means "station." Attendant (minister), "lesser in station" (minor in statione), or because such a one per- forms the service that he owes with his hands (manus).
171. 'Very great' (maximus), 'more distinguished' (magis eximius) in merit, age, honor, eloquence, valor, or in
everything. Greater (maior).. . Lesser (minor).. . Least (minimus), from the number 'one' (monas), because there is no other number below it. 172. Modicus, "lit- tle," but incorrectly; otherwise, "reasonable," "moder- ate" (moderatus), from measure (modus) and temper- ance. Mediocre (mediocris), because a small amount (modicum) is sufficient for such a one. 173. A wretch (miser) is properly so called because he has lost (amittere, perfect amisi) all happiness. According to Cicero, how- ever, it properly means "dead": in the Tusculan Disputa- tions (1.5) he called dead people 'wretches' because they have already lost their life. Pitiable (miserabilis), because one is 'liable to misery' (miseriae habilis). 174. Gloomy (mestus, i.e. maestus), sad by nature, not from circum- stances, because it is innate in the spirit and the mind (mens, gen. mentis), whence the term mestus. 175. Indi- gent (mendicus), so called because one has less (minus) from which he can carry on life - or, because it was the custom among the ancients for a destitute beggar to close his mouth and extend his hand, as if 'speak with the hand' (manu dicere). Liar (mendax), one who deceives the mind (mens) of another.
176. Malicious (malignus), because one carries out a vow or work of malice (malitia). Evil (malus) is named after black bile; the Greeks call black µs2aç. Hence those people are called melancholy (melancholicus) who flee human intercourse and are suspicious of dear friends. Malitiosus, "worse than evil (malus)," because frequently evil. Moreover, from malus the comparative is peior ("worse, more evil"); from bonus ("good, a good per- son") the comparative is deterior ("worse, not as good").
177. Better (melior), so called as if 'softer' (mollior); not hard or steely, for a better thing is as if it were softer. Threatening (minax, lit. "projecting"), from the look of one's eyes when they gleam madly, so that one seeing them becomes more fearful. Threatener (minator) and warner (monitor) - but a warner is so called because he announces good things, a threatener, because he announces unfavorable things. 178. Appeaser (mulcator), because one flatters (mulcere) with charming words in order to change a person's mind. The term is transferred from mulsum ("honey-wine"), that is, what is usually taken to soothe a sore throat or a belly filled with some- thing bad. 179. A metator is the name for a person who lays out campsites, after the word metiri ("to measure"). Lucan (cf. Civil War 1.382):
Let the bold metator come into the Hesperian fields.
Effeminate (mollis, lit. "soft"), because such a one dis- graces the vigor of his sex with his enervated body, and is softened (emollire) like a woman (mulier).
180. Thin (macer), from thinness (macies), and 'thin- ness' from adultery (moechia), because immoderate sex- ual desire makes people thin. Maimed (mancus), "lame of hand (manu ancus)." 181. Moribund (moribundus), "like one dying (moriri)," just as vitabundus (in classi- cal Latin, "avoiding") means "like one living" (cf. vita, "life"). When we say 'about to die' (moriturus), the per- son is indeed about to die, but when we say moribundus, he is not actually about to die, but is like a person who is dying. 182.A prostitute (meretrix) is so called because she earns (merere) a price for an act of lust. Hence also the term 'houses of prostitution' (meritoria taberna). Also soldiers are said to earn (merere) when they receive their wages. 183. Moron (morio), so called from death (mors), because such a one is not lively in intellect. Mule-driver (mulio), so called from mule (mulus), because one drives vehicles with them.
N. 184. Noble (nobilis), not base, one whose name and family are recognized. Nubile (nubilis), "marriageable" (ad nubendum habilis). Nobody (nemo), derived from 'human being' (homo), that is, ne homo ("not a per- son"), that is, 'no one.' Moreover, 'no one' (nullus), as if neullus ("not any one"). No one, not any one. 185. Worth- less (nihili) is compounded of nil ("not") and hilum ("a whit"). Varro says hilum means the pith of the giant fennel, which the Greeks call ?o??ó6?2oç ("asphodel"), and thus we say 'nothing' (nihilum) in the same way the Greeks say où6s ypu ("not a bit"). 186. Most people dis- tinguish mischievous (nequam) from evil (malus), reck- oning the latter as destructive, the former as trifling, as Munatius says (unidentified fragment): "This youth is mischievous, but he is not evil" - that is, bad in a trifling, not a destructive way. Other people confuse these terms as if both mean the same thing. 187. The ancients would have it that nequam is so called because such a one is 'not anything' (nec quicquam), that is, because he is nothing. Neuter (neuter), "neither this nor that," as if one would say ne uterque ("not either"). 188. Abominable (nefarius), "not worthy of spelt (far)"; by this type of food human life was first sustained. [Otherwise, abominable, "not to be spoken of " (cf. fari).] [Rearer (nutritor), as if one were an instructor by means of nodding gestures (nutus).] Unspeakable (nefandus), that is, one who ought not even to be named (cf. fari, gerundive fandus, "speak").
189. A nuntius is [both] "one who 'brings a message' (nuntiare)" and "what is announced," that is, ?yy?2oç and ?yy?2(c)a ("messenger" and "message"). But nun- tius as "messenger" is a word of masculine gender, but "that which he announces" is of neuter gender, as nun- tium and plural nuntia with neuter forms. 190. 'Nazarite' (Nazaraeus), that is, consecrated to God. Formerly a Nazarite meant one who would not cut his hair, retain- ing it as holy, and would countenance nothing tainted, abstaining from wine and every intoxicating drink that subverts the mind from its healthy soundness (see Num- bers 6:2-5). 191. 'Triflers' (nugas, i.e. nugae) is a Hebrew term, for so it is used in the prophets, where Zephaniah says (3:18): "The triflers (nugae; accusative nugas) that were departed from the law (I will gather together)" - so that we have reason to know that the Hebrew language is the mother of all languages. 192. Gossip (nugigerulus; cf. gerere, "carry"), because such a one is the messenger of scandal. Negligent (neglegens), [as if the term were] 'not reading' (nec legens). 193. 'Prodigal' (nepos), so called from a certain kind of scorpion (i.e. nepa) that con- sumes its offspring except for the one that has settled on its back; for in turn the very one that has been saved consumes the parent; hence people who consume the property of their parents with riotous living are called prodigals. Hence also nepotatio means riotous living, by which any belongings are surely consumed. 194. Black (niger), as if the word were 'clouded' (nubiger), because it is not clear but cloaked in darkness. Hence we also call a cloudy day 'foul' (teter, i.e. taeter).
O. 195. Orthodoxus, "of correct renown (recta gloria)." Orator (orator), so called from mouth (os, gen. oris), and named from 'complete a speech' (perorare), that is, "speak," for to orate (orare) is to speak. 196. Obedi- ent (obaudiens), from auris (ear), because such a one hears (audire) the one commanding. Guest (ospes, i.e. hospes, also meaning "host"), because he brings his 'foot to the door' (ostio pes). Ospes, "easy to deal with, adaptable, with open door"; from this term also a per- son is called hospitable (ospitalis, i.e. hospitalis). 197. Hater (osor), "inimical," so called from hatred (odium), just as the word 'lover' (amator) is from 'love' (amor).
Osor is of common gender. Hateful (odibilis), "liable to hatred" (odium). Obsitus, "besieged" (obsessus), that is, surrounded with ambushes (insidiae) on all sides. 198. Obscene (obscenus), of impure desire, so called from the vice of the Oscans (Obsci). Dull (obtunsus), "rather slug- gish and dense," as if 'battered' (tunsus) from every side. Resolute (obnixus), "resistant (contranisus; cf. niti, ppl. nisus, 'strive') and liable to struggle." Bound (obnexus), because one is tangled in the bonds (nexus) of guilt. 199. Charmer (oblectator), as if 'with milk (lac, gen. lactis),' means "with guile," as Terence (Andria 648):
Unless you had cajoled (lactare, homophone of lactare, "give milk to") me, a lover.
Whence also the verb 'delight' (oblectare). Detractor (obtrectator), one who is malicious and who by hinder- ing and obstructing doesn't permit someone to advance and become greater. 200. Childless (orbus), because one has no children, as if the word were 'with eyes missing' (cf. orbis, "circle, eye"). Workman (opifex), because he 'makes a work' (opus facere). Shepherd (opilio), ["keeper of sheep (ovis)"] ["feeder of sheep," as if ovilio].
P. 201. Prudent (prudens), as if 'seeing from afar' (porro videns). For he is foreseeing, and sees the outcome of uncertain things beforehand. Patient (patiens) is so called from 'striking' - for pavere (i.e. pavire) is "strike"- for such a one is beaten and endures it. 202. Perfected (perfectus), one to whom nothing can be added. Among grammarians no comparative degree is added to this word, because if one says "that one is more perfect" the first one willnot be perfect. 203. Good-looking (pulcher), so called from the appearance of the skin, because that is pellis ("skin"); afterwards this word was generalized, for the 'good looks' (pulchritudo) of a person are in one's face, as (Vergil, Aen. 1.589):
In face and shoulders like a god,
or in the hair, as (cf. Aen. 1.589):
For indeed (she endowed him with) beautiful hair,
or in the eyes, as (Aen. 1.591):
She endowed his eyes with happy grace,
or in fair skin, as (Aen. 1.592):
The kind of beauty that craftsmen give to ivory,
or in features, as (cf. Cicero, Second Action Against Verres [2.89]): "The figure and features of the guest delighted you much more," or in tall stature, as Turnus (Aen. 11.683):
He turns in their midst, and is a whole head taller.
204. Seductive (pellax), from 'enticing' (pellicere). Perspicax (in classical Latin, "sharp-sighted"), "splen- did," because one shines (perlucere). [Continuous (per- petuus) . . .] Perennial (perennis), because 'continu- ing through the years' (perpetuus annis). 205. Protec- tor (praesul), because such a one is 'first in caring' (praeesse sollicitudine). Overseer (praepositus; lit. one 'placed before': positus, ppl. of ponere + prae), so called because he is the administrator and director of under- lings and servants. Patrons (patronus) are so called from father (pater), because they have a fatherly affection for their clients, so that they govern them like fathers. 206. Paedagogus (i.e. a slave who took children to school and supervised their behavior) is the person to whom children are assigned. It is a Greek term (i.e. pat6a- yYyóç, from pa±ç, "child"; ?y?tv, "lead"), and it is a compound word because he 'conducts children' (pueros agere), that is, he leads them and restrains them in their childish play. 207. Present (praesens), so called because one is 'before the senses' (prae sentibus), that is, before the eyes, which are the senses of the body. Superior (prior), because one is first (primus) in order, and 'first,' as if the word were praeminens ("pre-eminent"). [First (primus).. . Last (postremus).. .] 208. Powerful (potens), extending (patere) widely in one's property; hence also 'power' (potestas), because it extends for him in what- ever direction he chooses, and no one closes him in, none can stand in his way. 'Very rich' (praeopimus), well-supplied with "goods (opes) beyond (prae) other people." 209. Moneyed (pecuniosus): Cicero (Republic 2.16; see 155 above) relates that at first those people were so called who had a lot of livestock (pecunia), that is, cattle (pecus), for so the ancients would call such people. However, gradually, through loose use of the term, the other meaning evolved.
210. Steadfast (pervicax) properly means one who
'perseveres to victory' (ad victoriam perseverare) in what he sets out to do, for the ancients used the word vica for our victoria. I think that from this term comes the word for the plant 'vetch' (vicia), that is, victorialis (i.e. another plant name). 211. Nimble (pernix) derives from
'striving through' (perniti), that is, "persevering in one's efforts." Others understand it to mean "swift of foot," for pernicitas ("swiftness") has to do with feet, as (Vergil, Aen. 11.718):
Flashing with swift (pernix) feet,
just as celeritas ("speed") has to do with wings, as (Aen.
3.243):
(Harpies) soaring with speedy (celer) flight to the sky.
212. Sluggish (piger), as if 'afflicted in the feet' (pedibus aeger), for such a one is slow to move forward. The term through usage passed over to apply to the mind. All-night (pernox), 'keeping watch at night' (pervigilans nocte). [Persevering (perseverans) . . .] Stubborn (perti- nax), "shamelessly hanging on," as if 'holding fast' (per- tinens). 213. Petulans nowadays means "bold-faced" and "saucy," but formerly "cruelly demanding people" and, strictly speaking, the agents of moneylenders who would exact what was owed frequently and harshly, called petu- lantes from pursuing (petere).
214. Forward (procax), properly the same as 'greedy' (petax), for to demand (procare) is to seek (petere). Hence a suitor for marriage is called procus. 215. Prodigal (prodi- gus), "a voluptuary and spendthrift," who 'drives far away' (porro agere) everything, and as it were 'throws it away' (proicere). Fugitive (profugus) properly means one who wanders far from his own land, as if the term were porro fugatus ("driven far"). Foreigner (peregrinus), one set far from his native country, just as alienigena ("born in another country"). 216. Far-flung (proiectus), as if 'flung far' (procul iactatus) and wide, just as 'he brought forth' (producere) is as if 'he brought someone far' (porro . . . ducere), and 'he called forth' (provocare), as if 'he called someone far' (porro . . . vocare). Projecting (proiectus), 'thrown out far' (porro eiectus) and 'thrust forth' (proiactatus), whence also (Vergil, Aen. 3.699):
And the projecting (proiectus) rocks,
that is, thrust far out (porro iactatus). Proscribed (pro- scriptus), one whose goods are openly and publicly listed (scribere, ppl. scriptus, i.e. for confiscation). Prescript (praescriptus) means an order, like the prescripts of jurists. 218. 'Girded up' (procinctus), "armed and ready"; whence the term in procinctu ("in arms"), that is, when men take up arms for war. Praecinctus, because one puts something in front of oneself by which he is girded (praecingere). Whence it was said concerning the Lord
(cf. John 13:5): "He was girded (praecinctus) witha towel, and he washed the feet of his disciples."
219. A raider (praedo) is one who invades a foreign province with plundering, called 'raider' from stealing booty (praeda), and a raider is someone who possesses booty. Plunderer (praedator), that is, the one to whom some of the booty (praeda) is owed. 220. Kidnapper (plagiator), after the term p2?ytoç ("crooked"), that is, "oblique," because he does not attack by a straight path, but by inveigling with guile. Pirates (pirata) are plun- derers of the sea, so called from their burning of the passing ships that they capture, for pUp? means "fire."
221. Messenger (pugillator), because he carries pieces of money from one hand (cf. pugillus, "handful") to another. Embezzler (peculator), because he steals pub- lic money (pecunia). Traitor (proditor), because such a one discloses (detegere). Again, a traitor is a destroyer (perditor), as (Vergil, Aen. 1.252):
We are betrayed (prodere, here also "ruined") because of the wrath of one.
222. Treacherous (perfidus), because fraudulent and without good faith (fides), as if 'losing faith' (perdens fidem). Perjured (periurus), one who 'falsely swears' (per- pere iurare), that is, swears wrongly. However, the verb form does not have the r, as we say peiuro ("I perjure") and deiero ("I swear"). 223. 'False accuser' (praevarica- tor), an advocate in bad faith, one who either neglects things that will be harmful when he prosecutes, or neglects things that will be profitable when he defends, or presents the case ineptly or doubtfully, having been corrupted by bribes. Cicero (unidentified fr.): "Why so very perverse (praevarus)?" - that is, extremely crooked (varus).
224. Seductive (pellax), "guileful and false," from 'skin' (pellis), that is, 'face,' for such a one smiles on the outside in order to deceive, but bears malice within. Impious (profanus), as if the term were porro a fano ("far from the sanctuary"), for such a one is not allowed to take part in holy rites. 225. Parricide (parricida) is the proper word for someone who kills his own parent (parens), although some of the ancients called this a parenticida because the act of parricide can also be understood as the
homicide (homicidium) of anybody, since one 'human being' (homo) is the equal (par) of another. 226. Per- secutor (persecutor) is not always understood in a bad sense. From this term also comes 'finished up' (persecu- tus), that is, 'thoroughly followed up' (perfecte secutus).
227.A publican (publicanus) is one who gathers the pub- lic taxes, or one who runs after the lucre of the world through public (publicus) business, whence such a one is named. 228. Sinner (peccator), so called from concu- bine (pelex, i.e. paelex), that is, prostitute, as if the term were 'seducer' (pelicator). Among the ancients this term signified only such shameful persons, but afterwards the term passed into use for any wicked person. 229. Pros- titutes (prostituta), "whores," from their 'sitting in pub- lic' (prosedere; cf. proseda, "prostitute") at flophouses or brothels; such a one is properly called pelex in Greek (cf. pa22am(c)ç, "concubine"); in Latin, concuba, and so called from fallacia, that is, "cunning deceit, guile, and trickery."
230. Crooked (procurvus), as if curved (curvus) length- wise. Alarmed (pavidus) is one whom agitation of mind disturbs; such a one has a strong beating of the heart, a moving of the heart - for to quake (pavere) is to beat, whence also the term pavimentum (beaten floor; cf. pavire, "ram down"). 231. A rustic (petro) and a boor (rupex) are so named from the hardness of stones (cf. petra and rupes, both meaning "rock"). Pusillani- mous (pusillanimis), one with 'very little courage' (pusil- lus animus). Wanton (petulcus), so called from 'eagerly desiring' (appetere), whence we call prostitutes petulcae. [Long-lived (productus) . . .] [Small (pisinnus) . . .]
Q. 232. Quaestor (quaestor, i.e. a prosecutor), so called from investigating (quaerere, ppl. quaesitus), as if the term were quaesitor. 'Financially successful' (quaestuo- sus) ... 233. Complaining (querimoniosus).. . Querulous (querulus), one who brings a complaint (querella). Calm (quietus), because such a one is untroubled in his own spirit, troubling no one.
R. 234. Religious (religiosus), says Cicero (On the Nature of the Gods 2.72), is so called from 're-reading' (relegere): one who reconsiders and, so to speak, re-reads the things that pertain to divine worship. They were called reli- gious people from 're-reading' in the same way that fas- tidious (elegens, i.e. elegans) is from 'choose' (elegere, i.e. eligere), caring (diligens) from 'care for' (diligere),
intelligent (intellegens) from 'understand' (intellegere).
235.A reasoner (rationator) is called a great man, because such a one is able to give a reason (ratio) for all the things that are considered marvelous. Reviser (retracta- tor), one who undertakes something anew, for to revise (retractare) means to undertake anew what you have left undone. 236. Reconverting (resipiscens, lit. "returning to one's senses"), because such a one recovers (recipere) his mind, as if after a period of insanity, or because one who stopped knowing 'knows again' (resapere), for he chastises himself for his folly and strengthens his spirit for right living, remaining watchful so as not to relapse. 237. Unexpected (repentinus), from sudden (repens). Repens can be both an adverb (i.e. "suddenly") and a substantive. Robust (robustus), "strong, vigorous," so called from the strength of the oak (roboreus) tree. Fast (rapidus), "swift of foot (pes, gen. pedis)." Ravisher (rap- tor), because he is a corrupter (corruptor), whence also 'raped woman' (rapta), because corrupted (corrupta).
238. Accused (reus), so called from the lawsuit (res) in which he is liable, and offence (reatum) from reus. 'Impeached for state treason' (reus maiestatis) was at first the term for one who had carried out something against the republic, or anyone who had conspired with the enemy. It was called 'impeached for state treason' becauseitis'graver'(maius) to harm one's nativecountry than a single citizen. Afterwards those people were called 'impeached for state treason' who were seen to have acted against the majesty (maiestas) of the head of state, or who had conferred unbeneficial laws on the state, or had abrogated beneficial ones. 239. Quarrelsome (rixosus), so called from canine snarling (rictus), for such a one is always ready to contradict, and delights in strife, and provokes an opponent. Rustic (rusticus), because such a one works the countryside (rus), that is, the earth.
S. 240. Wise (sapiens), so called from taste (sapor), because as the sense of taste is able to discern the taste of food, so the wise person is able to distinguish things and their causes, because he understands each thing, and makes distinctions with his sense of the truth. The opposite of this is a fool (insipiens), because he is with- out taste, and has no discretion or sense. 241. Assidu- ous (studiosus) . . . Holy (sanctus), so called from an ancient custom, because those who wished to be puri- fied would be touched by the blood (sanguis) of a sacri- ficial victim, and from this they received the name of
holy ones (sanctus). 242. Honest (sincerus), as if the term were 'without corruption' (sine corruptione), of which the opposite is dishonest (insincerus), "tainted, corrupt." Supreme (supremus), "the highest," because it 'rises above' (supereminere). Hence we also say, "O Supreme Father." [Agreeable (suavis) . . .] Exalted (sub- limis) is so called after the height of one's esteem, for strictly the term 'exalted' is used for what is on high, as (Vergil, Aen. 1.259):
And you will raise him on high (sublimis) to the stars of the sky.
243. Good-looking (speciosus), from appearance (species) or looks, as beautiful (formosus) is from shape (forma). Skillful (sollers), because one is engaged (sollic- itus) 'ina craft' (ars) and adroit, for among the ancients one who was trained in every good craft would be called skillful. Terence (Eunuch 478):
I will grant that the youth is skillful (sollers).
244. Those called the superstitious (superstitiosus), says Cicero (On the Nature of the Gods 2.72), are those "who would pray and make burnt offerings every day in order that their children might be their survivors (super- stes)." Busy (sollicitus), because such a one is skillful (sollers) and quick (citus) and restless. Diligent (sedu- lus), a familiar word in Terence, that is, 'without guile' (sine dolo); otherwise, assiduous (assiduus). 245. 'Com- rades' (sodalis) is the name for those who regularly con- vene under one sign (e.g., as of a guild), as if the term were 'persuaders' (suadentes). They are also called allies (socius) because of their alliance (societas) in danger and in work, as if they wore a single kind of shoe (cf. soccus, "shoe") and kept to the same track. 246. Stolid (stultus), rather dull in spirit, as a certain writer says (Afranius, fragment 416): "I consider myself to be stolid (stultus); I don't think myself a fool," that is, with dulled wits, but not with none at all. A stolid person is one who in his stupor (stupor) is not moved by injustice, for he endures and does not avenge cruelty, and is not moved to grief by any dishonor. 247. Sluggish (segnis), that is, 'without fire' (sine igni), lacking native wit - for se- means "without" (sine), as sedulus, sine dolo (see 244 above). Calm (secu- rus), as if the term were 'without anxiety' (sine cura) - that is, unresponsive, for which reason we take such people as unbeneficial.
248. Stupefied (stupidus), "rather often astounded (stupere)." Proud (superbus), so called because such a one wishes to seem above (super) where he is, for one who wishes to pass beyond (supergredi) what he is, is proud. 249. A tale-bearer (susurro) is so called after the sound of the word (cf. susurrus, onomatopoeic, "whis- pering"), because such a one speaks to someone not face to face but in the ear when gossiping maliciously about another person. 250. Factious (seditiosus), one who causes dissension of minds and brings about dis- cord, which the Greeks call 6t?otaotç ("disagreement"). Severe (severus), as if 'a true savage' (saevus verus); for he maintains justice without mercy. 251. A pretender (sim- ulator) is so called from likeness (simulacrum), for such a one adopts a semblance (similitudo) that is not him- self. Persuader (suasor) [from persuading (suadere) the person whom one wishes to deceive]. 252. [Assiduous (studiosus).. .] 'Minutely thorough' (scrupulosus), "of a finely discriminating and rigorous mind," for a scrupo (i.e. scrupus, "jagged stone") is a rather hard grain of sand. Sacrilegious (sacrilegus) is one who 'plucks sacred objects' (sacra legere), that is, steals them. A murderer (sicarius) is so called because he is armed with weapons in order to perpetrate a crime, for a sica is a dagger, so called from 'cut' (secare). 253. Sinister (scaevus), "on the left and perverse," after the term omatóç ("on the left, ill- omened"), for such a one has a most wicked and cruel temper. Stage-player (scenicus), one who performs in a theater, for a theater is a stage (scena). Prostitute (scor- tum, also meaning "skin"), because such a one is also called omátoç ("skin") in Greek; the skin of those for whom this vice is performed is rubbed by this person.
254. Unclean (spurcus), because such a one is impure (impurus). Scelerosus, "full of wickedness (scelus, gen. sceleris)" - like a place that is 'full of stones' (lapido- sus) or 'full of sand' (arenosus) - for a scelerosus person is worse than a sceleratus ("wicked") one. 255. Sator, a sower (seminator) or father, from seed (semen). Parasite (scurra), one who usually attends on someone for the sake of food; such a one is called scurra from his 'fol- lowing after' (sequi, ppl. secutus). Likewise, hanger-on (assecla), from sequi. Attendant (satelles), one who clings to another (alter), or guards his side (latus). 256. Sub-
stitute (suffectus), one put in place of another, as if the term were suffactus (i.e. sub + factus, "made under"). Hence we also speak of a consul as suffectus when he is substituted for another. 257. Subordinate (secundus),
because one is 'beside the feet' (secus pedes), and the term is derived from servants who follow (sequi, ppl. secutus) as footmen. Whence fortune is called favorable (secun- dus) because it is 'following after' (secundus) us, that is, is near us. Hence also a successful affair (res secundae), that is, a prosperous one. The 'after-birth' (secundae) is so called from 'following on' (sequi).
258. Stipulator (stipulator), "a promiser," for stipulor is 'promise,' from the terminology of jurists. 259. Healthy (sanus), from blood (sanguis), because such a one is not pale. [Safe (sospes) . . .] Slender (subtilis, also mean- ing "precise"), so called from thinness. 260. A trustee (sequester) is so called because he intervenes between disputants; he is called the µsooç ("middle," cf. µ?o(c)t?ç, "mediator") in Greek, and the disputants deposit pledges with him. The word derives from 'following' (sequi), because both parties would follow the trustworthiness of the chosen trustee. 261. Dwarf (sessilis), because such a one seems not to stand, but to sit (sedere, ppl. sessum). Deaf (surdus), from the filth (sordes) formed out of the humor in one's ear, and although deafness occurs on account of a number of reasons it still keeps the name of the foresaid defect. 262. Dry (siccus), because such a one is 'without juice' (exsucatus), or by antiphrasis, because he is without 'moisture' (sucus). Buried (sepultus) is so called because one is 'without a tremor' (sine palpatione) or 'without a pulse' (sine pulsu), that is, without motion.
263. Saio (i.e. an executor; see section 91 above; Thomp- son 1969:142), so called from 'bringing to completion' (exigere). Cobbler (sutor), named for his stitching (suere) hides. Swine-herd (subulcus),a herdsman of pigs (cf. sus, "swine"), just like a cow-herd (bubulcus), from keeping cattle (bos).
T. Guardian (tutor), one who 'looks after' (tueri, ppl. tuitus) a pupil, that is, attends (intueri) to him, con- cerning whom there is a common saying, "Why are you scolding me? I buried both my guardian and my school-servant some time ago." 265. Witnesses (testis) are so called because they would be used for a tes- tament (testamentum); similarly signatories (signator), because they sign (signare) a testament. 266. Tetricus is a very harsh mountain in the Sabine region - hence we call gloomy people tetricus. Taciturn (taciturnus), 'being silent for long periods' (tacere diuturnus). 267. Arbiter (trutinator), an examiner, weighing out true ver- dicts according to the scales of judgment, derived from
trutina, which is a pair of scales. 268. Sorrowful (tris- tis) . . . Grasping (tenax), too eager for money, because he holds (tenere) it fast - sometimes also pertinax. 269. [Savage (truculentus) . . .] Fierce (torvus), "terrible," because such a one has a twisted (tortus) face and a dis- turbing (turbulentus) look, as in "fierce lioness," and (Vergil, Aen. 3.677):
We see (the Cyclopes) standing there uselessly with terrible (torvus) eye.
270. Violent (turbidus), "terrible." Hideous (teter, i.e. taeter), because of a dark and shadowy life. 'Most sav- age' (teterrimus), for a too beastly person, for the ancients said teter for 'beastly,' as Ennius (Annals 607): "Hideous (teter) elephants." Terrible (terribilis), because such a one possesses terror (terror) and is feared. 271. Evader (tergiversator), because one changes his mind as if 'turn- ing his back' (tergum vertere) this way and that, so that it is not easy to understand what condition he is in. Drunk (temulentus), so called from 'intoxicating drink' (temetum), that is, wine. 272. Fearful (timidus), because one 'is afraid for a long time' (timere diu), that is, from one's bloody humor, for fear congeals the blood, which when coagulated causes fear. 273. Ugly (turpis), because one is ill-shaped and sluggish (torpere).
V. 274. Man (vir), from strength (virtus). Beneficial (utilis), from using (uti) one's property well, or because a thing can be well used, just as trainable (docilis), because such a one can be taught (docere). 275. True (verus), from truth (veritas); hence also verax ("truthful"). 'Truth' is prior to 'true,' because truth does not derive from a true person, but a true person from truth. 276. Truth- ful (veridicus), because he 'says a true thing' (verum dicere) and is a champion of the truth. 'Having a sense of honor' (verecundus), because he respects a true (verum)
deed. 277. Handsome (venustus), "good-looking," from one's veins (vena), that is, from blood. [Lively (viridis, lit. "green"), full of energy and sap, as if 'youthful with vigor' (vi rudis).] [Living (vivens), "alive" (vivus).] Fickle (varius), as if not having one path (via), but of unfixed and confused thought. Wily (versutus), because in any sort of action one's mind is easily turned (vertere, ppl. versus) toward some deceit. Hence also craftiness (ver- sutia) means "twisted thought." 278. Plautus (Epidicus 371):
[He is] wilier (versutior) than a potter's wheel.
279. [Base (vilis), from 'farm' (villa), because such a one has no urbanity.] Dissembling (versipellis, lit. "chang- ing one's skin"), because one changes (vertere, ppl. ver- sus) into various appearances and mental states. Hence also wily (versutus; see 277 above) and cunning. Violent (violentus), because one brings force (vis) to bear. Mad (vecors), having a bad spirit (cor) and a bad conscience. Wandering (vagus), because without a path (via). 280. Vain (vanus) derives its etymology from Venus. Again, vain, "empty, false," because one's mindfulness vanishes (evanescere). 281. Insane (vesanus), not properly sane (sanus). Vinolentus, one who both drinks a lot and only becomes drunk with difficulty (cf. vinum, "wine"; lentus, "slow"). Agitated (vexatus), that is, 'carried'; vexo is from the same root as veho and vecto, so that vexasse means "to have carried." 282. Poisoner (veneficus), because one has prepared or furnished or sold poison (venenum) as a cause of death. Bearer (vector), as if the term were 'conveyor' (vehitor); moreover, a vector is both one who conveys (vehere) and one who is conveyed. 283. Hunter (venator), as if the term were venabulator (i.e. the user of a venabulum, "hunting spear") - from the word 'hunting' (venatio) - that is, the hunting of wild animals. There are four roles for hunters: trackers, pursuers, wingmen, and drivers.
