i. God(Dedeo) 1. The most blessed Jerome, a most eru- dite man and skilled in many languages, first rendered the meaning of Hebrew names in the Latin language. I have taken pains to include some of these in this work along with their interpretations, though I have omitted many for the sake of brevity. 2. Indeed, exposition of words often enough reveals what they mean, for some hold the rationale of their names in their own deriva- tions.
First, then, we present the ten names by which God is spoken of in Hebrew. 3. The first name of God in Hebrew is El. Some translate this as "God," and oth- ers as "oyUpóç, that is, "strong" (fortis), expressing its etymology, because he is overcome by no infirmity but is strong and capable of accomplishing anything.
4. The second name is Eloi (i.e. Elohim), 5. and the third Eloe, either of which in Latin is 'God' (Deus). The name Deus in Latin has been transliterated from a Greek term, for Deus is from 6soç in Greek, which means ??óßoç, that is, "fear," whence is derived Deus because those worshipping him have fear. 6. Moreover 'God' is properly the name of the Trinity, referring to the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. To this Trin- ity are referred the remaining terms posited below of God.
7. The fourth name of God is Sabaoth, which is ren- dered in Latin "of armies" or "of hosts," of whom the angels speak in the Psalm (23:10 Vulgate): "Who is this King of glory? The Lord of hosts." 8. Now there are in the ordination of this world many hosts, such as angels, archangels, principalities, and powers, and all the orders of the celestial militia, of whom nevertheless he is Lord, for all are under him and are subject to his lordship.
9. Fifth, Elion, which in Latin means "lofty" (excelsus), because he is above the heavens (caelum), as was written of him (Psalm 112:4 Vulgate): "The Lord is high (excel- sus) . . . his glory above the heavens (caelus)." Further,
excelsus is so called from 'very lofty' (valde celsus), for ex is put for valde, as in eximius ("exceptional"), as it were valde eminens ("very eminent").
10. Sixth, Eie, that is, 'He who is.' For only God, because he is eternal, that is, because he has no ori- gin, truly holds the name of Being. Now this name was reported to the holy Moses by an angel, 11. for when Moses asked what was the name of the one who was commanding him to proceed with the liberation of his people from Egypt, he answered him (Exodus 3:14): "I am who I am: and thou shalt say to the children of Israel: 'He who is' hath sent me to you." It is just as if in compar- ison with him, who truly 'is' because he is immutable, those things that are mutable become as if they were not.
12. That of which it is said, "it was," 'is' not, and that of which it is said, "it will be," 'is' not yet. Further, God has known only 'is', and does not know 'was' and 'will be.' 13. For only the Father, with the Son and Holy Spirit, truly 'is.' Compared with his being, our being is not being. And for this reason we say in conversation, "God lives," because his Being lives with a life that death has no hold over.
14. Seventh, Adonai, which broadly means "Lord" (Dominus), because he has dominion (dominari) over every creature, or because every creature is subservient to his lordship (dominatus). Lord, therefore, and God, either because he has dominion over all things, or because he is feared by all things. 15. Eighth, Ia (i.e. Yah), which is only applied to God, and which sounds as the last syllable of 'alleluia.' 16. Ninth, the Tetragramma- ton, that is, the 'four letters' that in Hebrew are properly applied to God - iod, he, iod, he - that is, 'Ia' twice, which when doubled forms that ineffable and glorious name of God. The Tetragrammaton is called 'ineffable' not because it cannot be spoken, but because in no way can it be bounded by human sense and intellect; therefore, because nothing can be said worthy of it, it is ineffable. 17. Tenth, Shaddai, that is, "Almighty." He is called Almighty (omnipotens) because he can do all things (omnia potest), but by doing what he will, not by suffering what he does
not will. If that were to happen to him, in no way would he be Almighty - for he does whatever he wishes, and therein he is Almighty. 18. Again, 'Almighty' because all things in every place are his, for he alone has dominion over the whole world.
Certain other names are also said for God substan- tively, as immortal, incorruptible, immutable, eternal. Whence deservedly he is placed before every creature.
19. Immortal, as was written of him (I Timothy 6:16): "Who only hath immortality," because in his nature there is no change, for every sort of mutability not improperly is called mortality. From this it follows that the soul also is said to die, not because it is changed and turned into body or into some other substance, but because everything is considered mortal that in its very substance is now, or once was, of a different sort, in that it leaves off being what it once was. And by this reasoning only God is called immortal, because he alone is immutable. 20. He is called incorruptible (incorruptibilis) because he cannot be broken up (cor- rumpere, ppl. corruptus) and dissolved or divided. What- ever undergoes division also undergoes passing away, but he can neither be divided nor pass away; hence he is incorruptible.
He is immutable (incommutabilis) because he remains forever and does not change (mutare). 21. He neither advances, because he is perfect, nor recedes, because he is eternal. 22. He is eternal because he is without time, for he has neither beginning nor end. And hence he is 'forever' (sempiternus), because he is 'always eternal' (semper aeternus). Some think that 'eternal' (aeternus) is so called from 'ether' (aether), for heaven is held to be his abode. Whence the phrase (Psalm 113:16 Vulgate), "The heaven of heaven is the Lord's." And these four terms signify one thing, for one and the same thing is meant, whether God is called eternal or immortal or incorruptible or immutable.
23. 'Invisible,' because the Trinity never appears in its substance to the eyes of mortals unless through the form of a subject corporeal creature. Indeed, no one can see the very manifestation of the essence of God and live, as it was told to Moses (Exodus 33:20), whence the Lord says in the Gospel (John 1:18), "No man hath seen God at any time." Indeed, he is an invisible thing, and therefore should be sought not with the eye, but with the heart. 24. 'Impassible,' because he is affected by none of the disturbances to which human fragility
succumbs, for none of the passions touch him, not desire, wrath, greed, fear, grief, envy, and the other things with which the human mind is troubled. 25. But when it is said that God is angry or jealous or sor- rowful, it is said from the human point of view, for with God, in whom is utmost tranquillity, there is no disturbance.
26. Further he is called 'single' (simplex), either from not letting go of what he has, or because what he is and what is in him are not distinct, in the way that being and knowing are distinct for a human. 27. A human can be, and at the same time not have knowledge. God has being, and he also has knowledge; but what God has he also is, and it is all one. He is 'single' because there is nothing accidental in him, but both what he is and what is in him are of his essence, except for what refers to each of the three persons. 28. He is the 'ultimately good' (summe bonus) because he is immutable. What is created is good, to be sure, but it is not consummately good because it is mutable. And although it may indeed be good, it still cannot be the highest good. 29. God is called 'disembod- ied' (incorporeus) or 'incorporeal' (incorporalis) because he is believed or understood to exist as spirit, not body (corpus, gen. corporis). When he is called spirit, his sub- stance is signified.
30. 'Immeasurable' (immensus) because he encom- passes all things and is encompassed by nothing, but all things are confined within his omnipotence. 31. He is called 'perfect' (perfectus) because nothing can be added to him. However, 'perfection' is said of the completion of some making; how then is God, who is not made (factus), perfect (perfectus)? 32. But human poverty of diction has taken up this term from our usage, and like- wise for the remaining terms, insofar as what is ineffable can be spoken of in any way - for human speech says nothing suitable about God - so the other terms are also deficient. 33. He is called 'creator' because of the matter of the whole world created by him, for there is noth- ing that has not taken its origin from God. And he is 'one' (unus) because he cannot be divided, or because there can be no other thing that may take on so much power. 34. Therefore what things are said of God per- tain to the whole Trinity because of its one (unus) and coeternal substance, whether in the Father, or in his only- begotten Son in the form of God, or in the Holy Spirit, which is the one (unus) Spirit of God the Father and of his only-begotten Son.
35. There are certain terms applied to God from human usage, taken from our body parts or from lesser things, and because in his own nature he is invisible and incorporeal, nevertheless appearances of things, as the effects of causes, are ascribed to him, so that he might more easily make himself known to us by way of the usage of our speech. For example, because he sees all things, we may speak of his eye; because he hears all, we may speak of his ear; because he turns aside, he walks; because he observes, he stands. 36. In this way and in other ways like these a likeness from human minds is applied to God, for instance that he is forgetful or mind- ful. Hence it is that the prophet says (Jeremiah 51:14), "The Lord of hosts hath sworn by his soul" - not that God has a soul, but he speaks in this way as from our viewpoint. 37. Likewise the 'face' of God in Holy Scrip- ture is understood not as flesh, but as divine recognition, in the same way in which someone is recognized when his face is seen. Thus, this is said in a prayer to God (Psalm 79:4 Vulgate), "Shew us thy face," as if he were to say, "Grant us thy recognition."
38. Thus the 'traces' of God are spoken of, because now God is known through a mirror (I Corinthians 13:12), but he is recognized as the Almighty at the culmination, when in the future he becomes present face to face for each of the elect, so that they behold his appearance, whose traces they now try to comprehend, that is, him whom it is said they see through a mirror. 39. For in rela- tion to God, position and vesture and place and time are spoken of not properly, but metaphorically, by way of analogy. For instance (Psalm 98:1 Vulgate), "He that sit- teth on the cherubims" is said with reference to position; and (Psalm 103:6 Vulgate) "The deep like a garment is its clothing," referring to vesture; and (Psalm 101:28 Vul- gate) "Thy years shall not fail," which pertains to time; and (Psalm 138:8 Vulgate) "If I ascend into heaven, thou art there," referring to place. 40. Again, in the prophet (Amos 2:13), "As a wain laden with hay," an image is used of God. All these refer to God figuratively, because nothing of these things refers properly to his underlying being.
ii. The Son of God (De Filio Dei) 1. In the divine writ- ings Christ is also found to be named in many ways, for he, the only-begotten Son of God the Father, although he was the equal of the Father, took the form of a slave (Philippians 2:7) for our salvation. Whence some names
are given to him with regard to the substance of his divinity, and some with regard to the dispensation of his assumed humanity.
2. He is named 'Christ' (Christus) from 'chrism' (chrisma), that is, 'anointed one,' for it was a precept among the Jews that they would confect a sacred oint- ment by which those who were called to the priesthood or the kingship might be anointed. Just as nowadays for kings to be clothed in the purple is the mark of royal dignity, so for them anointing with sacred oint- ment would confer the royal title and power. Hence they are called 'anointed ones' (christus) from chrism, which is unction, 3. for the Greek chrisma is 'unction' (unctio) in Latin. When this anointing was done spiritually, it accommodated the name 'Christ' to the Lord, because he was anointed by the Spirit from God the Father, as in Acts (4:27): "For there assembled together in this city against thy holy child . . . whom thou hast anointed" - by no means with visible oil, but by the gift of grace, for which visible ointment is a sign. 4. 'Christ' is not, how- ever, a proper name of the Savior, but a common-noun designation of his power. When he is called 'Christ,' it is a common designation of his importance, but when he is called 'Jesus Christ' it is the proper name of the Savior. 5. Further, the name of Christ never occurred at all elsewhere in any nation except in that kingdom alone where Christ was prophesied, and whence he was to come. 6. Again, in Hebrew he is called 'Messiah' (Mes- sias), in Greek 'Christ,' in Latin 'the anointed' (unctus).
7. The Hebrew 'Jesus' is translated oYt?p in Greek, and "healer" (salutaris) or "savior" (salvator) in Latin, because he has come for all nations as the 'bearer of salva- tion' (salutifer). 8. The Evangelist renders the etymology of his name, saying (Matthew 1:21), "And thou shalt call his name Savior (salvator ; cf. Vulgate Iesus), for he shall save his people." Just as 'Christ' signifies a king, so 'Jesus' signifies a savior. 9. Not every kind of king saves us, but a savior king. The Latin language did not have this word salvator before, but it could have had it, seeing that it was able to when it wanted. 10. The Hebrew Emmanuel in Latin means "God is with us," undoubtedly because, born of a Virgin, God has appeared to humans in mortal flesh, that he might open the way of salvation to heaven for the inhabitants of earth.
Christ's names that pertain to the substance of his divinity are as follows: God (Deus), Lord (Dominus). 11. He is called God because of his unity of substance with
the Father, and Lord because of the creation subservient to him. 12. And he is God and man, for he is Word and flesh. Whence he is called the Doubly-Begotten (bis geni- tus), because the Father begot (gignere, ppl. genitus) him without a mother in eternity, and because a mother begot him without a father in the temporal world. 13. But he is called the Only-Begotten (unigenitus) according to the peerless quality of his divinity, for he is without brothers; he is called the First-Begotten (primogenitus) with regard to his assuming of human nature, in which he deigned through the grace of adoption to have brothers, among whom he was the first begotten.
14. He is called 'of one substance' (homousion, i.e. óµooáotoç) with the Father because of their unity of sub- stance, because in Greek substance or essence is called oùo(c)a and óµo- means "one." The two joined together therefore denote 'one substance.' For this reason he is called Homousion, that is (John 10:30), "I and the Father are one" - that is, of the same substance with the Father.
15. Although this name is not written in Sacred Scrip- ture, nevertheless it is supported in the formal nam- ing of the whole Trinity because an account is offered according to which it is shown to be spoken correctly, just as in those books we never read that the Father is the Unbegotten (Ingenitus), yet we have no doubt that he should be spoken of and believed tobe that.2 16. Homoeu- sion (i.e. óµotoáotoç), that is "similar in substance," because as God is, so also is God's image. Invisible is God, and invisible his image (i.e. the divinity latent in Jesus).
17. The Beginning (Principium), because all things are from him, and before him nothing was. 18. The End (Finis), either because he deigned at the end (finis) of time to be born and to die humbly in the flesh and to undertake the Last Judgment, or because whatever we do we refer to him, and when we have come to him we have nothing further to seek. 19. He is the 'Mouth of God' (Os Dei) because he is his Word, for just as we often say 'this tongue' and 'that tongue' for 'words,' which are made by the tongue, so 'Mouth' is substituted for the 'Word of God,' because words are normally formed by the mouth.
20. Further, he is called the Word (Verbum) because through him the Father established or commanded all things. 21. Truth (Veritas), because he does not deceive, but gave what he promised. Life (Vita) because he cre- ated. He is called the Image (Imago) because of his equiv- alent likeness to the Father. 22. He is the Figure (Figura)
because although he took on the form of a slave, he por- trayed in himself the Father's image and immeasurable greatness by his likeness to the Father in his works and powers.
23. He is the 'Hand of God' (Manus Dei) because all things were made through him. Hence also the 'Right Hand' (Dextera) because of his accomplishment of the work of all creation, which was formed by him. The Arm (Brachium), because all things are embraced by him.
24. The Power (Virtus), because he contains in himself all the authority of the Father, and governs, holds, and rules the whole creation of heaven and earth. 25. Wisdom (Sapientia), because he himself reveals the mysteries of knowledge and the secrets of wisdom. But although the Father and the Holy Spirit may be 'Wisdom' and 'Power' and 'Lamp' and 'Light,' nevertheless strictly speaking it is the Son who is designated by these names. 26. Again, he is called Clarity (Splendor) because of what he plainly reveals. Lamp (Lumen), because he illuminates (illu- minare). Light (Lux), because he unlocks the eyes of the heart for gazing at the truth. Sun (Sol), because he is the illuminator. 27. The Orient (Oriens, i.e. "East," "Sunris- ing") because he is the source of light and the brightener of things, and because he makes us rise (oriri) to eternal life. 28. The Fount (Fons), because he is the origin of things, or because he satisfies those who thirst.
He is also the A and W. He is Alpha because no letter precedes it, for it is the first of the letters, just as the Son of God is first, for he answered the Jews interrogating him that he was the beginning (John 8:25). Whence John in the Apocalypse, properly putting down the letter itself, says (22:13), "I am A and W, first and last." First, because before him nothing is. Last, because he has undertaken the Last Judgment. 29. Mediator (Mediator), because he has been constituted a mean (medius) between God and humanity, so that he might lead humanity through to God - whence the Greeks also call him µ?o(c)t?ç ("medi- ator"). 30. Paraclete, that is, advocate, because he inter- cedes for us with the Father, as John says of him (I John 2:1), "We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just." 31. For Paraclete (Paracletus) is a Greek word that means "advocate" in Latin. This name is ascribed to
both the Son and the Holy Spirit, as the Lord says in the Gospel (John 14:16), "I will ask the Father, and he shall give you another Paraclete."
32. Also the Son is called Intercessor (Intercessor), because he devotes care to remove our sins, and he exerts effort to wash away our crimes. 33. Bridegroom (Spon- sus), because descending from heaven he cleaves to the Church, so that by the grace of the New Covenant they might be two in one flesh. 34. He is called an Angel (Angelus, i.e. 'messenger') because of his announcing of his Father's and his own will. Whence it is read in the Prophet (cf. Isaiah 9:6), "Angel of great counsel," although he is God and Lord of the angels. 35. He is called the 'One Sent' (Missus) because he appeared to this world as the Word made flesh, whence also he says (John 16:28), "I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world." 36. He is also called the 'Human Being' (Homo) because he was born. Prophet (Propheta), because he revealed future things. Priest (Sacerdos), because he offered himself as a sacrifice for us. Shep- herd (Pastor), because he is a guardian. Teacher (Mag- ister), because he shows the way. Nazarene (Nazarenus) from his region, but Nazarite (Nazareus) is an earned title meaning "holy" or "clean," because he did no sin.
37. Further, Christ attracts to himself types of names from other lesser things so that he might more easily be understood. 38. For he is called Bread (Panis) because he is flesh. Vine (Vitis), because we are redeemed by his blood. Flower (Flos), because he was picked. The Way (Via), because by means of him we come to God. The Portal (Ostium), because through him we make our approach to God. Mount (Mons), because he is mighty. Rock (Petra), because he is the strength of believers. 39. Cornerstone (Lapis angularis), because he joins two walls coming from different directions, that is from the cir- cumcised and the uncircumcised, into the one fabric of the Church, or because he makes peace in himself for angels (angelus) and humans. 40. The Stumbling-stone (Lapis offensionis), because when he came in humility unbelievers stumbled (offendere) against him and he became a 'rock of scandal' (Romans 9:33), as the Apos- tle says (I Corinthians 1:23), "Unto the Jews indeed a stumbling block (scandalum)."
41. Further he is called the Foundation (Fundamen- tum) because faith on him is most firm, or because the Catholic Church was built upon him. 42. Now Christ is the Lamb (Agnus) for his innocence, and the Sheep
(Ovis) for his submissiveness, and the Ram (Aries) for his leadership, and Goat (Haedus) for his likeness to sin- ful flesh, 43. and the Calf (Vitulus) because he was made a sacrificial victim for us, and Lion (Leo) for his king- dom and strength, and Serpent (Serpens) for his death and his sapience (sapientia), and again Worm (Vermis) because he rose again, 44. Eagle (Aquila) because after his resurrection he returned to the stars.
Nor is it a wonder that he should be figured forth by means of lowly signs, he who is known to have descended even to the indignities of our passions or of the flesh. 45. For although he is coeternal with God the Father before worldly time, when the fullness of time arrived, the Son for our salvation took the form of a slave (Philippians 2:7), and the Son of God became a son of humankind. 46. For this reason some things are said of him in Scripture according to the form of God, some according to the form of a slave. Two of these should be kept in mind for an example, so that particular instances may severally be connected with these particular forms. So, he spoke of himself according to the form of God (John 10:30), "I and the Father are one"; according to the form of a slave (John 14:28), "For the Father is greater than I."
47. But people who little understand how one thing may be said for another wish to transfer to the Son's character as God what has been said with regard to his character as a slave. Again, they want what has been said relating the Persons to one another to be names for God's nature and substance, and they make an error in their faith. 48. For human nature was so conjoined to the Son of God that one Person was made from two sub- stances. Only the man endured the cross, but because of the unity of Person, the God also is said to have endured it. 49. Hence we find it written (I Corinthians 2:8), "For if they had known it, they never would have crucified the Lord of glory." Therefore we speak of the Son of God as crucified, not in the power of his divinity but in the weakness of his humanity, not in his persistence in his own nature but in his acceptance of ours.
iii. The Holy Spirit (De Spiritu Sancto) 1. The Holy Spirit is proclaimed to be God because it proceeds from the Father and the Son, and has God's substance, for no other thing could proceed from the Father than what is itself the Father. 2. It is called the Spirit (spiritus, i.e. 'breath' or 'spirit') because when it is breathed (spirare, ppl. spiratus) it is transferred to something else;
moreover, its action inspires with its breath, so to speak, and consequently it is called the Spirit. It is called the Holy Spirit for a certain appropriate reason, in that the term is related to the Father and the Son, because it is their spiritus. 3. Now this name 'Spirit' is also conferred not because of what is imparted to something, but because of what signifies some kind of nature. 4. Indeed, every incorporeal nature in Holy Scripture is called spirit, whence this term suits not only the Father and Son and Holy Spirit, but also every rational creature and soul. 5. Therefore the Spirit of God is called Holy, because it is the holiness of the Father and Son. Although the Father is spirit and the Son is spirit, and the Father is holy and the Son is holy, properly nevertheless this one is called Holy (sanctus) Spirit, as the co-essential and consubstantial holiness (sanctitas) of both the others.
6. The Holy Spirit is not spoken of as begotten (geni- tus) lest it should be thought that there are two Sons in the Trinity. It is not proclaimed as unbegotten (ingeni- tus), lest it should be believed that there are two Fathers in that same Trinity. 7. It is spoken of, however, as pro- ceeding (procedere), by the testimony of the Lord's saying (cf. John 16:12-15), "I have yet many things to say to you, but you cannot hear them now. But he, the Spirit of truth who proceeds from the Father, will come, and he shall receive of mine; he shall show everything to you." This Spirit moreover proceeds not only by its nature, but it proceeds always in ceaselessly performing the works of the Trinity. 8. Between the Son who is born and the Holy Spirit who proceeds is this distinction, that the Son is born from one, the Holy Spirit proceeds from both. Therefore the Apostle says (Romans 8:9), "Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his."
9. In its work the Holy Spirit is alsounderstoodtobean angel, for it is said of it (John 16:13), "And the things that are to come, he shall announce (adnuntiare) to you" - and the Greek term 'angel' means "messenger" (nuntius) in Latin. Hence also two angels appeared to Lot, and to these the name 'Lord' was given in the singular; we understand them to have been the Son and the Holy Spirit, for we never read that the Father is 'sent.'
10. The Holy Spirit, because it is called the Paraclete, is named from 'consolation,' for the Greek term pap?m2?- otç in Latin means "consolation." Thus Christ sent the Spirit to the mourning apostles, after he ascended from their eyes to heaven. 11. For it is sent as a consoler to those
who grieve, and according to the saying of the same Lord (Matthew 5:5), "Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be consoled." Again he said (Matthew 9:15), "Then the children of the bridegroom shall mourn, when the bridegroom shall have been taken away from them." 12. Again, Paraclete, because it offers consolation to souls that have lost temporal joy. Others say that 'Paraclete' in Latin means "orator" or "advocate," for one and the same Holy Spirit speaks; it teaches; through it are given words of wisdom; by it Holy Scripture has been inspired.
13. The Holy Spirit is named the Sevenfold (septi- formis) because of the gifts that all have a claim to attain from the fullness of its unity, one by one, according as they deserve. Thus it is the Spirit of wisdom and intellect, the Spirit of counsel and courage, the Spirit of knowledge and holiness, the Spirit of the fear of the Lord (Isaiah 11:2- 3). 14. Further, we read of the 'perfect Spirit' (principalis Spiritus) in the fiftieth Psalm, where because spiritus is repeated thrice, some understand the Trinity, since it is written (John 4:24), "God is a spirit." Indeed, because he is not a body, and yet he exists, it seems to remain that he is a spirit. Some understand that the Trinity is signified in Psalm 50: in the "perfect Spirit" (vs. 14) the Father, in the "right Spirit" (vs. 12) the Son, in the "holy spirit" (vs. 13) the Holy Spirit.
15. The Holy Spirit is called a Gift because it is given, for 'gift' (donum) takes its name from 'giving' (dare). Now it is very well known that our Lord Jesus Christ, when he had ascended into heaven after his resurrection from the dead, gave the Holy Spirit, and filled with this Spirit the believers spoke in the tongues of all nations.
16. Moreover it is a gift of God to the extent that it is given to those who love God through the Spirit. In itself, it is God; with regard to us, it is a gift - but the Holy Spirit is forever a Gift, handing out the gifts of grace to individuals as it wishes. 17. It imparts the gift of prophecy to whomever it wishes, and it forgives sins for whomever it wishes - for sins are not pardoned without the Holy Spirit. 18. The Holy Spirit is appropriately named Charity (caritas) either because by its nature it joins with those from whom it proceeds and shows itself to be one with them, or because it brings it about in us that we remain in God and he in us. 19. Whence among the gifts of God nothing is greater than charity, and there is no greater gift
of God than the Holy Spirit. 20. It is also Grace (gratia), and has this name because it is given freely (gratis) not according to our merits, but according to divine will.
Further, just as we speak of the unique Word of God properly by the name of Wisdom, although generally both the Holy Spirit and the Father himself are wisdom, so the Holy Spirit is properly named by the word Charity, although both the Father and the Son are in general charity. 21. The Holy Spirit is very clearly declared in the books of the Gospel to be the Finger (Digitus) of God, for when one Evangelist said (Luke 11:20), "I by the finger of God cast out devils," another said the same thing in this way (Matthew 12:28), "I by the Spirit of God cast out devils." Wherefore also the law was written by the finger of God, and it was granted on the fiftieth day after the slaughter of the lamb, and on the fiftieth day after the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ came the Holy Spirit.
22. Moreover it is called the Finger of God to signify its operative power with the Father and the Son. Whence also Paul says (I Corinthians 12:11), "But all these things one and the same Spirit worketh, dividing to every one according as he will." Just as through Baptism we die and are reborn in Christ, so we are sealed by the Spirit, which is the Finger of God and a spiritual seal. The Holy Spirit is written to have come in the form of a dove (columba) in order that its nature might be expressed through a bird of simplicity and innocence. Whence the Lord said (Matthew 10:16), "Be ye simple as doves" - for this bird is without bile in its body, and has only innocence and love.
23. The Holy Spirit is referred to by the name of Fire (ignis) because it appeared as fire in the distribution of tongues in the Acts of the Apostles (2:3), and it settled on each of them. 24. Moreover it gave the gift of diverse tongues to the apostles so that they might be made capa- ble of instructing the faithful people. 25. But the Holy Spirit is remembered as having settled upon each of them so that it may be understood not to have been divided into many, but to have remained whole with respect to each one, as is generally the way with fire. 26. For a kindled fire has this nature, that however many should behold it, however many should behold that mane of purple splendor, to that same number would it impart the sight of its light, and offer the ministry of its gift, and still it would persist in its integrity.
27. The Holy Spirit is referred to by the name Water (aqua) in the Gospel, as the Lord cries out and says (John
7:37-38), "If any man thirst, let him come to me, and drink. He that believeth in me, Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water." Moreover, the Evangelist explained his words, for in the following sentence (39) he says, "Now this he said of the Spirit which they should receive, who believed in him." 28. But the water of the sacrament (i.e. of Baptism) is one thing, and the water that signi- fies the Spirit of God is another, for the water of the sacrament is visible, the water of the Spirit is invisible. The former cleanses the body, and symbolizes what takes place in the soul; but through the latter, the Holy Spirit, the soul itself is purified and fed.
29. As the apostle John witnesses, the Holy Spirit is called Unction (unctio) because, just as oil floats above every liquid because of its physical weight, so in the beginning the Holy Spirit floated above the waters (Gen- esis 1:2). Whence we read that the Lord was anointed with the 'oil of gladness' (Hebrews 1:9, etc.), that is with the Holy Spirit. 30. But the apostle John also calls the Holy Spirit 'unction,' saying (I John 2:27): "And as for you, let the unction, which you have received from him, abide in you. And you have no need that any man teach you; but as his unction teacheth you of all things." Now that is the Holy Spirit, an invisible unction.
iv. The Trinity (De Trinitate) 1. The Trinity (Trinitas) is so named because from a certain three (tres) is made one (unum) whole, as it were a 'Tri-unity' (Triunitas) - just like memory, intelligence, and will, in which the mind has in itself a certain image of the divine Trin- ity. Indeed, while they are three, they are one, because while they persist in themselves as individual compo- nents, they are all in all. 2. Therefore the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are a trinity and a unity, for they are both one and three. They are one in nature (natura), three in person (persona). One because of their shared majesty, three because of the individuality of the persons.
3. For the Father is one person, the Son another, the Holy Spirit another - but another person (alius), not another thing (aliud), because they are equally and jointly a sin- gle thing (simplex), immutable, good, and coeternal. 4. Only the Father is not derived from another; therefore he is called Unbegotten (Ingenitus). Only the Son is born of the Father; therefore he is called Begotten (Genitus). Only the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son; therefore it alone is referred to as 'the Spirit of both the others.'
5. For this Trinity some names are appellative (appella- tivus), and some are proper (proprius). The proper ones name the essence, such as God, Lord, Almighty, Immutable, Immortal. These are proper because they signify the very substance by which the three are one.
6. But appellative names are Father and Son and Holy Spirit, Unbegotten and Begotten and Proceeding. These same are also relational (relativus) because they have ref- erence (referre, ppl. relatus) to one another. When one says "God," that is the essence, because he is being named with respect to himself. But when one says Father and Son and Holy Spirit, these names are spoken relationally, because they have reference to one another. 7. For we say 'Father' not with respect to himself, but with respect to his relation to the Son, because he has a son; likewise we speak of 'Son' relationally, because he has a father; and so 'Holy Spirit,' because it is the spirit of the Father and the Son. 8. This relationship is signified by these 'appellative terms' (appellatio), because they have reference to one another, but the substance itself, in which the three are one, is not thus signified.
Hence the Trinity exists in the relational names of the persons. Deity is not tripled, but exists in singleness, for if it were tripled we would introduce a plurality of gods.
9. For that reason the name of 'gods' in the plural is said with regard to angels and holy people, because they are not his equal in merit. 10. Concerning these is the Psalm (81:6 Vulgate), "I have said: You are gods." But for the Father and Son and Holy Spirit, because of their one and equal divinity, the name is observed to be not 'gods' but 'God,' as the Apostle says (I Corinthians 8:6): "Yet to us there is but one God," or as we hear from the divine voice (Mark 12:29, etc.), "Hear, O Israel: the Lord thy God is one God," namely inasmuch as he is both the Trinity and the one Lord God.
11. This tenet of faith concerning the Trinity is put in this way in Greek: 'one oùo(c)a,' as if one were to say 'one nature' (natura) or 'one essence' (essentia); 'three úpoot?o?tç,' which in Latin means "three persons" (per- sona) or "three substances" (substantia). 12. Now Latin does not speak of God properly except as 'essence'; peo- ple say 'substance,' indeed, but metaphorically, for in Greek the term 'substance' actually is understood as a person of God, not as his nature. 
v. Angels (De angelis) 1. Angels (angelus) are so called in Greek (i.e. ?yy?2oç); they are malachoth in Hebrew,
but translated in Latin as "messengers" (nuntius), because they announce (nuntiare) the will of God to peo- ple. 2. The term for angels is thus the name of their func- tion, not of their nature. Indeed they are always spirits, but when they are commissioned they are called angels.
3. For this reason the license of artists makes wings for them, to signify their swift course on all their missions, just as in poetic fiction the winds are said to have wings to indicate their speed. Whence also Holy Scripture says (Psalm 103:3 Vulgate), "Who walketh upon the wings of the winds."
4. Holy Scripture witnesses moreover that there are nine orders of angels, that is Angels, Archangels, Thrones, Dominations, Virtues, Principalities, Powers, Cherubim, and Seraphim (angelus, archangelus, thronus, dominatio, virtus, principatus, potestas, cherub, seraph). As to why these names are given to their offices, I shall go through them with explanations. 5. Angels are so called because they are sent from heaven in order to announce (nuntiare) things to humans, for the Greek 'angel' means "messenger" (nuntius) in Latin.
6. Archangels are translated from Greek as "highest messengers" (summus nuntius), for those who announce small or trifling things are Angels, but those who announce the highest (summus) things are named Archangels. Archangels are so called because they hold primacy among the angels, for ?pyóç in Greek is trans- lated "prince" (princeps) in Latin. Indeed they are the leaders and princes, and under their Archangel order the tasks for each of the Angels are assigned. 7. That Archangels take precedence over Angels the prophet Zechariah bears witness, saying (2:3-4), "Behold the angel that spoke in me went forth, and another angel went out to meet him. And he said to him: Run, speak to this young man, saying: Jerusalem shall be inhabited without walls." 8. But if the higher powers did not assign their duties as angels to the lower ones, in no way would one angel have come to know from another what he should say to a human.
9. Moreover certain archangels are called by individ- ual names, so that how they successfully discharge their duties might be designated through their names them- selves. 10. 'Gabriel' in Hebrew is rendered in our lan- guage "Strength of God," because where divine power or
strength is displayed, Gabriel is sent. 11. Hence at the time when the Lord was about to be born and triumph over the world, Gabriel came to Mary to announce him who deigned to come as a humble person to conquer the aerial powers. 12. 'Michael' means "Who is like God," for when something of wonderful power is done in the world, this archangel is sent. And his name comes from the work itself, because no one is strong enough to do what God can do. 13. 'Raphael' means "Healing" or "Medicine of God," for whenever there is need of healing and cur- ing this archangel is sent by God - hence he is called "Medicine of God." 14. Hence this same archangel, sent to Tobit, brought healing to his eyes, and restored his sight to him as his blindness was wiped away. Thus the office of the angel is designated by the interpretation of his name. 15. 'Uriel' means 'Fire of God,' as we read that he appeared as a fire in a bush (cf. Exodus 3:2). We read, indeed, that as fire he was sent from above, and fulfilled what was commanded.
16. Further, Thrones and Dominations and Principali- ties and Powers and Virtues are understood to be orders and ranks of angels, in which orders the apostle Paul includes the whole heavenly company (Ephesians 1:21, Colossians 1:16, etc.). Because of this same distribution of offices some are called Thrones, some Dominations, some Principalities, some Powers, for the sake of the par- ticular ranks by which they are distinguished from one another.
17. Angelic Virtues are named as the specific ministries through which signs and miracles are made in the world, and because of this they are called Virtues (Virtutes). 18. The Powers are those angels to which opposing forces are subject, and hence they are named with the term Powers (Potestates) because evil spirits are restrained by their power (potestas) so that they may not do as much harm in the world as they wish. 19. Principalities (Principatus) are those who preside over the bands of angels, and they take the name of Principality because they charge the angels below them with fulfilling the divine ministry. Thus there are some who administer (administrare) and others who assist (adsistere), as is said in Daniel (7:10), "Thousands of thousands ministered (ministrare) to him, and ten thousand times a hundred thousand stood before (adsistere) him."
20. Dominations are those who surpass even Virtues and Principalities. They are called Dominations (Domi- nationes) because they dominate (dominari) other bands
of angels. 21. Thrones are bands of angels that in Latin are called 'seats' (sedes), and they are called Thrones because the Creator 'sits over' (praesidere) them, and discharges his judgments through them. 22. Cherubim too are reckoned as lofty powers indeed in heaven, and an angelic retinue. Translated from Hebrew into Latin they are 'Multitude of Knowledge' (multitudo scientiae), for they are a higher band of angels, and because, placed nearer, they have been more amply filled with divine knowledge than the others, they are called Cherubim, that is, "Fullness (plenitudo) of Knowledge." 23. They are represented in metal as the two animals resting on the mercy seat of the ark in order to signify the presence of angels in whose midst God is manifested.
24. Likewise the Seraphim are a multitude of angels whose name, translated from Hebrew into Latin, is "Ardent Ones" or "Fiery Ones." They are called 'Ardent Ones' because no angels are stationed between them and God, and therefore, the more nearly they are stationed to his presence, the more they are inflamed with the bright- ness of the divine light. 25. Whence they veil the face and feet of the one who sits on the throne of God (Isaiah 6:2); for that reason the crowd of other angels cannot fully see the essence of God, because the Cherubim (sic, for 'Seraphim') cloak it.
26. These terms for the bands of angels are specific for the individual orders in such a way that they still may be to some extent common to all. Thus, whereas the Thrones are specifically designated as the seats of God in a particular order of angels, nevertheless the Psalmist says (79:2 Vulgate), "Thou that sittest upon the cheru- bims." 27. But these orders of angels are called by their individual names because they have more fully received that particular function in their own order. Although common to them all, still these names are strictly speak- ing assigned to their own orders. 28. For to each order, as has been said, has been enjoined its proper functions, which they are known to have deserved at the beginning of the world.
Because angels preside over both places and humans an angel witnesses through a prophet, saying (Daniel 10:13), "The prince of the kingdom of the Persians resisted me." 29. Whence it is apparent that there is no place over which angels are not set. Moreover they have charge of the outcome of all endeavors. 30. This is the hierarchy or the array of the angels who stood in their celestial vigor after the Fall of the bad angels, for after the
apostate angels fell, these were made firm in the stead- fastness of eternal blessing. Whence we find, after the creation of heaven in the beginning (Genesis 1:6, 8), "Let there be a firmament (firmamentum)... and the firma- ment was called, Heaven." 31. This is surely the saying of one who is showing that after the Fall of the bad angels those who were steadfast strove for the firmness (firmi- tas) of eternal perseverance; diverted by no lapse, falling in no pride, but firmly (firmiter) holding steady in the love and contemplation of God, they consider nothing sweet except him by whom they were created.
32. Further, we read of two Seraphim in Isaiah (6:2); they figuratively signify the Old and New Testaments. We also read that they cover the face and feet of God, because we cannot know the past before the world or the future after the world, but we contemplate only the middle by their witness. 33. Each of them has six wings because in this present age we know concerning the fabric of this world only those things that were made in the six days. That each cries "Holy" three times to the other (Isaiah 6:3) shows the mystery of the Trinity in the one divinity.
vi. People who received their name from a certain pre- saging (De hominibus qui quodam praesagio nomen acceperunt) 1. Many of the early humans take the origin of their names from conditions specific to them. Their names were imparted to them prophetically in such a way that they concord with their future or their previous con- ditions. 2. While a holy and spiritual character abides in these names, we are now describing the meaning of their stories only with regard to the literal. Moreover, where we have not touched on the meaning of the etymology, we have merely set it forth in Latin. 3. Further, because of the diversity of accents and letters, it happens that one Hebrew name is transliterated in one way or another, so that the names are rendered with various meanings.
4. Adam, as blessed Jerome informs us, means "human" or "earthling" or "red earth," for from earth was flesh made, and humus (humus) was the mate- rial from which the human (homo) was made. 5. Eve (Eva) means "life" or "calamity" or "woe" (vae). Life, because she was the origin of being born; calamity and woe because by her lying she was the cause of death - for 'calamity' (calamitas) takes its name from 'falling' (cadere). 6. But others say Eve is called 'life' and 'calamity' because often a woman is the cause of salvation for a man, often the cause of calamity and death, which is woe.
7. 
Cain is interpreted as "possession," whence, express- ing this very etymology, his father says 'Cain,' that is (Genesis 4:1), "I have gotten (lit. 'I have possessed,' pos- sidere)a man through God." And the same name means "lamentation," because he was killed for the killing of Abel, and he paid the penalty for his own crime. 8. Abel means "mourning," and by this name it was prefigured that he would be killed. Likewise it means "emptiness," because he was quickly removed and taken away.
9. Seth is translated "resurrection," because he was born after the killing of his brother, as if he triggered the resurrection of his brother from the dead. It also means "putting," because God put him in place of Abel. 10. Enos in a variation in his own language means "human being" or "man," and he had this name fittingly, for it is written of him (Genesis 4:26), "Then was the begin- ning of calling upon the name of the Lord" - although many of the Hebrews think rather that it was at that time that idols were first made in the name of the Lord and in his likeness. 11. Enoch means "dedication," for afterwards Cain built a city in his name (Genesis 5:17).
12. Cainan (i.e. Kenan) means "lamentation" or "pos- session of those," for as Cain means "possession," so the derivative name, which is Cainan, forms "possession of those." 13. Methuselah is translated "he has died." The etymology of his name is obvious, for some think that he was translated with his father and that he lived past the time of the Flood. Against this it is significantly trans- lated "he has died" to show that he did not live beyond the Flood, but died in that same cataclysm. Indeed, only the eight humans in the ark escaped the Flood.
14. Lamech means "striking down," for he struck down and killed Cain, and indeed afterwards he con- fesses to his wives that he did this (cf. Genesis 4:23-24). 15. Noah means "rest," since under him all past works came to rest because of the Flood. Whence his father, calling his name Noah, said (Genesis 5:29), "This same makes us rest from all our works." 16. Shem means "renowned," because he got his name as a presaging of his posterity, for out of him came the patriarchs and apostles and people of God. Also from his stock came Christ, whose name is great among the nations from the rising of the sun to its setting. 17. Cham (i.e. Ham) means "warm," and he was
so named as a presaging of his future, for his posterity possessed that part of the land which is warmer because the sun is near. Hence still today Egypt, in the Egyp- tian language, is called Kam. 18. Japheth means "width," for from him were born the pagan nations, and because wide is the multitude of believers from among the gen- tiles, Japheth was named from that width. 19. Canaan the son of Ham is translated "their movement" - and what is this other than "their action"? - for because of the "motion" of his father Ham, that is, because of his action, he was cursed (Genesis 9:25).
20. Arpachshad means "the healer of the ravaging."
21. Cush in Hebrew is interpreted "the Ethiopian"; his name was allotted him from the posterity of his fam- ily, for from him issued the Ethiopians. 22. Nimrod means "tyrant," for first he seized unwonted tyranni- cal power among the people, and then himself advanced against God to build the tower of impiety. 23. Heber (i.e. Eber) means "passage." His etymology is mystical, because God passed away from his stock, nor would God remain among them when his grace was transferred to the gentiles - for from Heber rose the Hebrews. 24. Peleg means "division," and his father imposed such a name on him because he was born when the earth was divided by its languages. Terah means "investigation of the ascen- sion." 25. Melchizedech means "righteous king." "King," because afterwards he ruled Salem. "Righteous," because distinguishing between the sacraments of the Law and the Gospel, he offered as a sacrifice not victims of cattle, but an oblation of bread and the chalice. 26. Lot means "shunning," for he did not consent to the doings of the Sodomites, but he shunned their illicit passions of the flesh. 27. Moab means "from the father." And the (com- pound) name as a whole has this etymology, for Lot's firstborn daughter conceived him from her father.
28. Ammon, whose name for good reason is rendered "the son of my people," is so derived that partly its sense is of a proper name, and partly it is an expression in itself, for ammi, after which the Ammonites are named, is the word for "my people." 29. Sarai means "my princess," because she was the materfamilias of only one household. Afterwards, as the rationale for her name has changed, with the letter i taken away from the end, she is called Sara (i.e. Sarah), that is, "princess." Indeed she was to be the princess of all nations, as the Lord had promised to Abraham (Genesis 17:16), "I will give thee from Sara a son, whom I will bless, and he shall become
nations, and kings of people shall spring from her."
30. Hagar is "alien" or "turned back," for she was [as an alien given to the embrace of Abraham for the sake of bearing children, and after her display of contempt, when the angel rebuked her, she turned back to Sara]. 31. Keturah, "incense." 32. Ishmael is translated "listening of God," for thus it is written (Genesis 16:11), "And she called his name Ishmael, because God listened to him."
33. Esau is three-named, and is variously named for appropriate reasons. He is called Esau, that is, "red," so named for his stewing specifically of the red lentil, for the eating of which he lost his birthright. Also he was called Edom, which means "bloody" in Latin, for the ruddiness of his body. But Seir, because he was bristly and hairy, for when he was born he was all hairy as if with a hide. 34. So he was named with three names: Esau, that is, "red"; Edom, that is, "bloody"; Seir, that is, "hairy," because he did not have smooth skin. 35. Rebecca, "patience," or "she who accepts much." 36. Leah, "burdened by labor" as of childbearing, for she in her fecundity of child- bearing experienced more pangs than Rachel. 37. Rachel means "sheep," for Jacob put the sheep of Laban to pas- ture for her sake. 38. Zilpah, "yawning mouth." Bilhah, "inveterate." Dinah is translated as "cause," for she was the cause of the quarrel in Shechem. 39. Tamar, "bitter- ness," because of the death of her husbands, and also "she who changes," because she changed herself into the garb of a prostitute when she lay with her father-in-law.
40. Perez (Phares), "division": because he divided the membrane of the afterbirth, he was allotted the name of "divider," that is, phares. Whence also the Pharisees, who would separate themselves from the people as if they were righteous, were called "the divided ones." 41. Perez's brother Zerah, in whose hand was the scarlet thread, is interpreted "rising." Either because he appeared first, or because many righteous people sprang from him, as is contained in the book of Paralipomenon (I Chronicles 9:6), he was called Zerah, that is, "rising." 42. Job is rendered in Latin as "the grieving one," and rightly the grieving one (dolens), for the smiting of his flesh and his endurance of afflictions (dolor). Indeed the etymology of his name prefigured his calamities.
43. Pharaoh is the name not of a person, but of a posi- tion of rank, just as among us kings are called 'Augustus,' although they are listed by their proper names. Further, in Latin 'Pharaoh' expresses "one denying him," to wit, God, or "his scatterer," for he was the afflicter of the
people of God. 44. Jannes, "the mariner," or "where is the sign," for his sign ceased and failed before the signs of Moses, whence the magicians said (Exodus 8:19), "This is the finger of God." 45. Mambres (i.e. Jambres), "the sea made of skins" or "the sea in the head." 46. Then, Moses means "taken from the water." The daughter of Pharaoh found him exposed at the bank of the river, and picking him up she adopted him for herself, and she called his name 'Moses' because she took him from the water.
47. Aaron means "mountain of strength," because tak- ing his censor he stood in the way between the survivors and those who had been killed, and as a kindof mountain of strength he prevented the destruction of death (Num- bers 16:46-48). 48. Eleazar, "the help of God." Balak, "the one falling headlong" or "the devouring one." Bal- aam, "the idle people." 49. Phinehas, "one who spares the mouth," for with a dagger he pierced Zimri along with his Madianite harlot, and appeased the fury of the Lord, so that he might be sparing (Numbers 25:6-15).
50. This Zimri is "the provoker" or "the one who causes bitterness," and his name is appropriately figured by bit- terness, because by sinning he embittered the people. 51. Rahab, "breadth" or "hunger" or "onslaught."
Joshua means "savior," for he, adumbrating Christ, saved the people from the wilderness and led them into the promised land. 52. Caleb, as it were "heart" or "dog." Othniel, "his time, God" or "the answer of God." Ehud, "glorious." Barak, "one who sends lightning." 53. Debo- rah, "bee" or "the talkative one." "Bee," because she was most quick to act, as she was struggling against Sisera, at whose slaying she sang her song - hence "the talkative one." Jael, "ascension." 54. Gideon, "proof of their iniq- uity," for he was informed, with repeated instances, by what kind of forewarning he might achieve a future vic- tory over his enemies; from this proof of what would happen he got the etymology of his name.
Abimelech, "my father the king." 55. Tola, "little worm" or "scarlet cloth." Jair, "one who sheds light." Jephthah, "the opener" or "the one opened." Ezbon, "thought" or "fetters of grief." Abdon "his slave." 56. Samson, "their sun" or "the strength of the sun," for he was famous for his strength and liberated Israel from its enemies. Dalilah, "poor girl" or "bucket." Boaz, "in strength" [or] "in whom is toughness." 57. Naomi, which we can interpret as "she who is consoled," because when her husband and children had died in a foreign country
she clung to her Moabite daughter-in-law as a consola- tion for herself. 58. Ruth means "hastening," for she was an alien from a non-Israelite people, who hastened, her homeland abandoned, to cross into the land of Israel, saying to her mother-in-law (Ruth 1:16), "Whitherso- ever thou shalt go, I will go." 59. Hannah is interpreted as "his grace" because, while first she was sterile by nature, afterwards by the grace of God she became fertile.
Eli, "my God." 60. Hophni, "unshod," for this son of Eli was chosen for the ministry of priesthood, and he represented his loss of the priesthood by his own name, for the Apostle says (Ephesians 6:15), "Your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace." 61. And the Prophet (cf. Isaiah 52:7), "How beautiful are the feet that bringeth tidings of peace!" Therefore the name means "unshod," in order that by his name might be signified the removal of the priesthood of the Old Testament from the ancient nation. 62. Phinehas, the brother of Hophni, means "mute mouth," in which is signified the silence of the old priesthood and doctrine.
Samuel, "his name God." Jesse, "sacrifice of the island" or "incense." 63. Saul [means] "petition," for it is well knownhow the Hebrew people petitioned for himas a king for themselves, and received him not according to God, but according to their own will. 64. David, "strong in his hand," in that he was very strong in battles. And the name means "desirable," namely in his progeny, about which the Prophet made his prediction (Haggai 2:8), "And the desired of all nations shall come." 65. Solomon is said to have three names. His first name is Solomon, that is, "peacemaking," because there was peace in his reign. His second name was Jedidiah, because he was esteemed and beloved of the Lord. His third name was Coheleth, which in Greek is called 'Ecclesiastes,' in Latin 'the Preacher,' because he would speak to the people.
66. Jonathan, "gift of a dove." 67. Absalom, "peace of the father" by antiphrasis, because he waged war against his father, or because in that war David is read to have been brought to peace with his son, so much that he lamented his death with huge grief. 68. Rehoboam, "breadth of the people," and that significa- tion by antiphrasis, because when the ten tribes were separated from him, only two remained for him. 69. Abijam, "father Lord" or "he was father." Asa, "one who lifts" or "one who raises up." Jehoshaphat, "judg- ment of the Lord." Jehoram, "he who is lofty." Ahaziah, "he who grasps the Lord." 70. Athaliah, "time of the
Lord." Joash, "he who breathes" or "the toughness of the Lord." Amaziah, "he who lifts up the people."
71. Uzziah, "strength of the Lord." Azariah, "help of the Lord." Uzziah and Azariah are the same person with two names. It is he who, having tried to lay claim to an unlaw- ful priesthood for himself, was stricken with leprosy in the face.
72. Jotham, "he is perfect," making a fine etymology of his name, for he did right in the sight of the Lord, and built a lofty gate for the Temple. 73. Ahaz, "he who grasps." Hezekiah, "strong Lord." Manasseh, "forget- ful," for with many impieties and sacrileges he forsook and was forgetful of God, [or because God was forgetful of his sins]. 74. Amon, "faithful" or "burdened." Josiah, "where is the kindling of the Lord" - an appropriate ety- mology for his name, for it was he who burnt up the idols. 75. Jehoahaz, "tough." Jehoiakim, "where is the preparation."
Eliakim, "resurrection of God." Jehoiachin, "prepa- ration of the Lord." Zedekiah, "righteous of the Lord."
76. Jeroboam, "judgment" or "cause of the people," or, as some say, it means "division," because in his reign the people of Israel were divided and cut off from the reign of the line of David - for he stood out as the cause of the division of the people. 77. Zimri, "psalm" or "my song." Omri, "my curled one." Ahab, "brother of the father."
78. Jezebel, "flux of blood," or "she who streams with blood"; but better, "where is the dung-heap" - for when she was hurled down headlong, dogs devoured her flesh, as Elijah had predicted (IV Kings 9:37 Vulgate): he said, "And the flesh of Jezebel shall be as dung upon the face of the earth."
79. Ahaziah, "he who grasps God." Jehu, "that one" or "he is." Jotham, "the tough one." Shallum, "his shadow," or "petition." Menahem, "the consoler." Pekah, "he who opens." 80. Nebuchadnezzar, "prophecy of the narrow flask," or "one who prophesies" a symbol of this kind, namely with regard to the dream of future things that he is reported to have seen, which Daniel interpreted; or, "a lingering in the recognition of difficulties," with regard to those who were led by him into captivity. 81. The name Zerubbabel is said to have been composed in Hebrew from three whole words: zo, "that," ro, "master," babel, properly "Babylonian"; and the name is compounded Zorobabel, "that master from Babylon," for he was born in Babylon, where he flourished as prince of the Jewish people.
vii. 
Thepatriarchs(Depatriarchis) 1. The etymologies of certain patriarchs ought to be noted, so that we may know what is reflected in their names, for many of them took their names from specific causes. 'Patriarchs' means "chiefs among the fathers" (patrum principes), for ?pyóç in Greek means 'chief' (princeps). 2. At first "Abram" was so called - "father seeing the people" - with regard to Israel only. Afterwards he was called 'Abraham,' which is translated "father of many nations," which was yet to come to pass through faith. However, "nations" is not contained in the name but is understood, according to this (Genesis 17:5): "Thy name shall be Abraham, because I have made thee a father of many nations." 3. Isaac took his name from "laughter," for his father had laughed when Isaac was promised to him, astonished in joy. And his mother laughed, doubting in joy, when Isaac's birth was promised by the three men. Therefore he took the name Isaac for this reason, for it means "laughter."
4. It should moreover be known that four people in the Old Testament were given their names with- out any concealment before they were born: Ishmael, Isaac, Solomon, and Josiah. Read the Scriptures (Gene- sis 16:11, Genesis 21:6, II Kings 12:25, III Kings 13:2 Vul- gate - see vi.74 above). 5. Jacob means "the supplanter," either because in birth he clutched the heel (planta) of his newborn brother, or because afterwards he deceived his brother by a stratagem. Whence Esau said (Gene- sis 27:36), "Rightly is his name called Jacob, for he hath supplanted me lo this second time." 6. Israel, "the man seeing God," for he received this name at the time when having wrestled all night he beat the angel in a struggle, and was blessed at daybreak. Hence because of his vision of God he was called Israel, as he himself says (Genesis 32:30), "I have seen God and my soul has been saved." 7. 'Reuben' means "son of the vision." Indeed, when Leah gave birth to him, she called his name Reuben, saying (Genesis 29:32), "For God saw my affliction."
8. 'Simeon' is interpreted "the hearing," for thus Leah said when she gave birth to him (Genesis 29:33), "For God heard me." 9. Levi, "the added one," for Leah said when she gave birth to him, not doubting the love of her husband (Genesis 29:34), "Now my husband will be with me, because I have borne him three sons." 10. Judah is called "the proclamation," for when Leah gave birth to him she offered up praise to the Lord, saying (Genesis 29:35), "Now over this I will proclaim the Lord," and for this he was called Judah. Accordingly his name was so
called from "proclamation," because it is a rendering of thanks.
11. Issachar means "he is a recompense"; is indeed means "he is," and sachar means "recompense." This is because Leah purchased for herself intercourse with her husband, which was owed to Rachel, with the mandrakes of her son Reuben. Whence when Issachar was born Leah said (Genesis 30:18), "God hath given my recompense."
12. Zebulun means "dwelling place," for Leah gave birth to him as her sixth son, and therefore now assured she said (Genesis 30:20), "My husband shall dwell with me." Whence her son was called "habitation." 13. Naphtali: the principle in his name has to do with "conversion" or "comparison" (comparatio), whence Rachel said, when her maid Bilhah had given birth to him, "God hath made me live in a dwelling with my sister." 
14. Dan means "judgment," for when Bilhah gave birth to him, her mistress Rachel said (Genesis 30:6), "The Lord hath judged for me, and hearing my voice he hath given me a son." She expressed the principle in his name in that, because the Lord had judged, she imposed the name 'judgment' on the son of her maidservant.
15. Gad was named from "outcome" or "disposition," for when Zilpah had given birth to him, her mistress Leah said (Genesis 30:11), "Happily," that is, meaning with regard to his disposition or to his outcome. 16. Asher means "blessed," for when Zilpah had given birth to him, Leah said (Genesis 30:13), "Blessed am I, and women bless me." She called Asher 'blessed' in the ety- mology of his name because she is called blessed.
17. Joseph: because his mother had wanted to add another for herself, she called him "the addition." Pharoah called him Zaphanath, which in Hebrew signi- fies "discoverer of hidden things," because he laid bare the obscure dreams and predicted the blight. 18. Still, because this name was imposed on him by the Egyptian, it ought to have a rationale in the Pharoah's own tongue. Therefore in Egyptian speech Zaphanath is interpreted "savior of the world," because he liberated the land from imminent destruction by famine. 19. Benjamin means "son of the right hand," that is, "of valor," for the right hand is called iamin. Indeed his dying mother gave him the name Benoni, that is, "son of my pain." His father changed this, naming him "son of the right hand." 20. Manasseh was so called because his father was unmind- ful of his hardships, for this is the word for "unmind- fulness" in Hebrew. 21. Ephraim, because God added
him on, and the name is translated in our language as "addition."
viii. The prophets (De prophetis) 1. Those whom the pagan world calls bards (vates) we call prophets (propheta), as if they were 'pre-speakers' (praefator), because indeed they speak (fari, ppl. fatus) and make true predictions about the future. Those whom we call prophets were called 'seers' (videns) in the Old Testa- ment, because they saw (videre) things that others did not see, and would foresee things that were hidden in mystery. 2. Hence it is written in Samuel (I Kings 9:9), "Let us go to the seer (videns)." Hence Isaiah says (6:1), "I saw (videre) the Lord sitting on a throne high and elevated," and Ezekiel (1:1), "The heavens were opened and I saw (videre) the visions of God."
3. The etymologies of the names of certain prophets should be remarked, for their names well display what they foretold about future things by their deeds and words. 4. Elijah means "the Lord God." He was so called as an omen of the future, for when he contended about the sacrifice with the four hundred priests of Baal, as the name of the Lord was invoked, fire descended from heaven on the burnt offering (III Kings 18:39), "And when all the people saw this, they fell on their faces and said: The Lord he is God." 5. For this reason he received such a name beforehand, because afterwards through him the people recognized the Lord God. The same name means "strong Lord," either because he killed those same priests, or because he endured the enmity of Ahab.
6. Elisha means "salvation (salus) of the Lord." He too got his name as an omen of the future, and accordingly worked many miracles, and in driving away the famine he saved (salvare) the people from death. 7. Nathan, "he gave" or "of the giver." Isaiah means "savior of the Lord," and deservedly, for more fully than others he heralded the Savior of the whole world and his holy mysteries.
8. Jeremiah, "lofty of the Lord," because of what was said to him (Jeremiah 1:10), "I have set thee over the nations, and over kingdoms." 9. Ezekiel, "strength of God." Daniel, "judgment of God," either because in his judgment of the elders he delivered a judgment based on divinely inspired consideration when he freed Susanna
from destruction by uncovering their falsity, or because, discerning with shrewd intelligence, he disclosed visions and dreams in which the future was revealed by certain details and riddles. And he was called (Daniel 9:23) "a man of desires," because he did not eat the bread of desire, nor drink the wine of concupiscence.
10. Hosea, "savior," or "he who saves" (salvans), for when he prophesied the wrath of God against the people Israel for their crime of idolatry, he announced the safety (salus) of the house of Judah. Because of this Hezekiah, king of Judah, is shown to have purged and purified the Temple of the Lord once the idols that preceding kings had consecrated were removed. 11. Joel, "Lord God," or "beginning in God," or "he was of God" - these because his name reflects an uncertain etymology. 12. Amos, "the people torn away," for his prophecy was directed toward the people Israel, because they were already torn away from the Lord, and worshipped golden calves, or they were torn from the reign of the line of David.
13. Nahum, "the groaning one" or "the consoler," for he cries out against the "city of blood" (Nahum 3:1), and after its overthrow he consoles Zion, saying (Nahum 1:15), "Behold upon the mountains the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, and that preacheth peace."
14. Habakkuk, "the one who embraces." He is either called "embrace" because he was beloved of God, or, because he engaged in contention with God, he was allotted the name of "the one who embraces," that is, of "the one who wrestles." Indeed, no other dared with such bold voice to provoke God to a debate about jus- tice, as to why such great iniquity is involved in human affairs and in the affairs of this world.
15. Micah, "who is this?" or "who is that one?"
16. Zephaniah is interpreted "looking-glass" (speculum) or "hidden thing of the Lord"; either is appropriate for a prophet because they know the mysteries of God. Whence it is said to Ezekiel (3:17), "I have made thee a watchman (speculator)." And elsewhere (cf. Amos 3:7), "For the Lord will do nothing without revealing to his servants the prophets." 17. Obadiah, "slave of the Lord," for as Moses was servant of the Lord and the apostle Paul was the slave of Christ, so Obadiah, sent as the "ambas- sador to the nations" (Obadiah 1:1), comes and preaches what befits his prophetic ministry and servitude- hence, "slave of the Lord."
18. Jonah means "dove" or "the mourner." "Dove" for his groaning, when he was in the belly of the huge fish for three days, and "the mourner" either because of the grief he felt for the safety of the Ninevites or because of the suddenly withered ivy in the shade of which he took cover against the heat of the sun. 19. And he is also, as the Jews affirm, Amittai, the son of the widow of Zarephath whom Elijah resuscitated, as his mother afterwards said to him (III Kings 17:24 Vulgate), "Now I know that thou art a man of God, and the word of God in thy mouth is of truth." For this reason the boy was called Amittai, for Amittai, from the Hebrew, means "truth" in Latin, and because Elijah spoke a true thing, the boy who was resuscitated was named "the son of truth."
20. Zechariah, "memory of the Lord," for at the end of the seventieth year after the destruction of the Temple was finished, while Zechariah was preaching, the Lord remembered his people, and by the command of Dar- ius the people of God returned, and both the city and the Temple were rebuilt. 21. Haggai in Latin signifies "hasty" (festinus)8 and "joyful," for he prophesies that the destroyed Temple is to be built, and after the grief of the captivity he preaches the joy of the return. 22. Malachi means "angel of the Lord," that is, "messenger," for whatever he said was trusted as if commanded by the Lord. Hence the Septuagint translates his name in this way, saying (Malachi 1:1), "The burden of the word of the Lord to Israel by the hand of his angel."
23. Ezra, "the helper." Nehemiah, "the consoler from the Lord." These names were allotted as a certain omen of the future, for they were a help and a consolation for his whole people as they returned to their homeland. Indeed these same two rebuilt the Temple of the Lord, and they restored the works of the walls and towers.
24. Hananiah, "the grace of God." The same person is also Shadrach in the Chaldean language, which means "my handsome one." 25. Azariah, "help of the Lord," and he is the same as Abednego, which is turned into Latin as "as a slave I am silent." 26. Mishael, "who is the people of the Lord," and he is also Meshach, which means "laughter" or "joy."
27. Ahijah, "my brother." Shemaiah, "he who hears the Lord." Asaph, ["he who gathers"]. Ethan, ["the tough one" or "he who has ascended"]. 28. Jeduthun, "he who leaps across those" or "he who jumps those," for this per- son called 'the leaper across' leapt by his singing across certain people who were cleaving to the ground, bent
down to the earth, thinking about things that are at the lowest depths, and putting their hope in transient things. 29. Heman, "he who accepts" or "their dread." Ethan, "the tough one." Berechiah, "blessed of the Lord" or "blessed Lord." Huldah, "distraction" or "diversion." Judith, "she who praises" or "she who proclaims." Esther, "the hidden one."
30. Zechariah, ["memory of the Lord," for what he sings (Luke 1:72), "to remember his holy testament"].
31. John [the Baptist, "grace of the Lord," because he was the end of prophecy, the herald of grace, or the begin- ning of baptism, through which grace is administered].
32. These are the prophets of the Old and New Testa- ment, of whom the last is Christ, to whom it is said by the Father (Jeremiah 1:5), "I made thee a prophet unto the nations."
33. Moreover, there are seven kinds of prophesy. The first kind is ecstasy (ecstasis), which is a passing beyond of the mind, as when Peter in a stunned state of mind saw that vessel let down from heaven with various animals (see Acts 10:11-12). 34. The second kind is vision (visio), as when Isaiah says (Isaiah 6:1), "I saw (videre, ppl. visus) the Lord sitting upon a high throne." The third kind is dream (somnium), as Jacob while sleeping saw the ladder reaching up to heaven. The fourth kind is through a cloud, as God speaks to Moses and to Job after he was stricken. 35. The fifth kind is a voice from heaven, like that which sounded to Abraham saying (Genesis 22:12), "Lay not thy hand upon the boy," and to Saul on the road (Acts 9:4), "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?"
36. The sixth kind occurs when an oracle (parabola) is received, as with Solomon in Proverbs, and with Balaam when he was called upon by Balak. The seventh kind is being filled (repletio) with the Holy Spirit, as with nearly all the prophets.
37. Others have said that there are three kinds of visions (visio). One, according to the eyes of the body, as Abra- ham saw three men under the holm-oak of Mambre, and Moses saw the fire in the bush, and the disciples saw the transfigured Lord on the mountain between Moses and Elijah, and others of this kind. 38. A sec- ond, according to the spirit, in which we imagine what we sense through the body, as Peter saw the dish sent down from heaven with the various animals (Acts 10:11- 12), and as Isaiah saw God on the highest seat, not bodily but spiritually (Isaiah 6:1). 39. For no bodily form limits God, but in the same way that many things are said not
properly but figuratively, so also many things are shown figuratively.
40. Then there isa third kind of vision, which is neither by bodily senses nor by that part of the soul where images of corporeal things are grasped, but by insight (intuitus) of the mind where intellectual truth is contemplated, as the gifted Daniel saw with his mind what Belshazzar had seen with his body. Without this kind of vision the other two are either fruitless or positively lead into error. Still, the Holy Spirit governs all these kinds of vision.
41. Further, not only a good person, but also a bad person can have prophecy, for we find that King Saul prophesied, for he was persecuting the holy David, and filled with the Holy Spirit he began to prophesy.
ix. The apostles (De apostolis) 1. Apostle (apostolus) means "one who is sent," for the name indicates this. Just as in Greek ?yy?2oç means "messenger" (nuntius) in Latin, so 'one who is sent' is called an 'apostle' in Greek (i.e. ?póoto2oç), for Christ sent them to spread the gospel through the whole world, so that certain ones would penetrate Persia and India teaching the nations and working great and incredible miracles in the name of Christ, in order that, from those corroborating signs and prodigies, people might believe inwhat the Apostles were saying and had seen. Most of them receive the rationale for their names from these activities.
2. Peter (Petrus) took his name from 'rock' (petra), that is, from Christ, on whom the Church is founded. Now petra is not given its name from Petrus, but Petrus from petra, just as 'Christ' is so called not from 'Chris- tian,' but 'Christian' from 'Christ.' Therefore the Lord says (Matthew 16:18), "Thou art Peter, and upon this rock (petra) I will build my church," because Peter had said (Matthew 16:16), "Thou art Christ, the Son of the liv- ing God." Then the Lord said to him, "Upon this rock" which you have proclaimed "I will build my church," for (I Corinthians 10:4) "the rock was Christ," on which foundation even Peter himself was built. 3. He was called Cephas because he was established as the head (caput) of the apostles, for m???a2? in Greek means 'head,' and Cephas is the Syrian name for Peter. 4. Simon 'Bar-Jonah' in our tongue means "son of a dove," and is both a Syrian and a Hebrew name, for Bar in the Syrian lan- guage is "son," 'Jonah' in Hebrew is "dove," and Bar- Jonah is composed of both languages. 5. Some people simply take it that Simon, that is Peter, is the son of
John, because of that question (John 21:15), "Simon of John, lovest thou me?" - and they consider it corrupted by an error of the scribes, so that Bar-Iona was writ- ten for Bar-Iohannes, that is, 'son of John,' with one syllable dropped. 'Johanna' means "grace of the Lord."
6. So Peter was three-named: Peter, Cephas, and Simon Bar-Jonah; further 'Simon' in Hebrew means "he who listens."
7. Saulin Hebrewspeechmeans"temptation," because he was at first involved in temptation of the Church, for he was a persecutor; hence he had that name when he was persecuting Christians. 8. Afterwards, with the name changed, from Saul was made Paul, which is interpreted "the wonderful one" or "the chosen one." Wonderful, because he performed many signs or because from east to west he preached the gospel of Christ to all the nations.
9. Chosen, as the Holy Spirit says in the Acts of the Apostles (13:2), "Separate me Barnabas and Paul, for the work whereunto I have chosen them." Further in Latin speech Paul (Paulus; cf. paulus, "little") is so called from "little," whence he himself says (I Corinthians 15:9), "For I am the least of all the apostles." Thus when he was Saul he was proud and haughty; when Paul, humble and little. 10. Therefore we speak thus, "after a little (paulo) I will see you," that is, after a short time. Now because he became little, he himself says (cf. I Corinthians 15:8), "For I am the last [of all] the apostles," and (Ephesians 3:8), "To me, the least of all the saints." Both Cephas and Saul, then, were called by a changed name so that they would indeed be new even in their names, like Abraham and Sarah.
11. Andrew, the brother of Peter in the flesh, and his co-heir in grace; according to its Hebrew etymology 'Andrew' means "handsome one" or "he who answers," and further in Greek speech he is called "the manly one" from the word for "man" (cf. Greek ?v?p, gen.
?v6póç, "man"). 12. John with a certain prophetic fore- sight deservedly got his name, for it means "in whom is grace" or "grace of the Lord." Indeed, Jesus loved him more fully than the other apostles. 13. James of Zebedee has his surname from his father, and leaving his father he with John followed the true Father. These are (Mark 3:17) the "Sons of Thunder" who were named 'Boan- erges' from the strength and greatness of their faith. This James is the son of Zebedee, the brother of John, who is revealed to have been killed by Herod after the ascension of the Lord.
14. 
James of Alphaeus, surnamed so as to be distin- guished from the other James who is called the son of Zebedee, as this second one is the son of Alphaeus. Therefore both took their surnames from their fathers.
15. The latter is James the Less, who is called the brother of the Lord in the Gospel, because Mary the wife of Alphaeus was the sister of the mother of the Lord, and the evangelist John surnamed the former Mary 'of Clopas' after her father, assigning her this name either from the nobility of her family or for some other reason. Further, 'Alphaeus' in Hebrew speech means "the thousandth" or "the learned one" in Latin. 16. Philip, "mouth of lamps" or "mouth of hands." Thomas, "the abyss" or "the twin," whence in Greek he is also called Didymus. Bartholomew, "son of the one supporting the waters" or "son of the one supporting me." This is Syriac, not Hebrew. 17. 'Matthew' in Hebrew expresses "the one granted." This same person was also called Levi after the tribe from which he sprang. Further, in Latin he got the name of 'the publican' from his work, for he was chosen from among the publicans and brought into the apostolate.
18. Simon the Cananean, as distinct from Simon Peter, is named after the Galilean township Cana where the Lord changed water into wine. It is this one who by another evangelist is designated 'the Zealot'; indeed 'Cana' means "zeal." 19. Judas of James, who elsewhere is called Lebbaeus, has his symbolic name from the word for 'heart,' which we can call "little heart" in the diminu- tive. Another Gospel writer (Matthew 10:3) calls this Judas 'Thaddaeus.' Church history relates that he was sent to Edessa to the king of the Abgars. 20. Judas Iscar- iot got his name either from the township in which he was born or from the tribe of Issachar, with a certain omen of the future as to his own condemnation, for 'Issachar' means "payment," to signify the traitor's price for which he sold the Lord, as it is written (cf. Matthew 27:9), "And they took" my payment, "the thirty pieces of silver, the price that I was prized by them."
21. Matthias, who is considered the only one among the apostles to be without a surname, means "the one granted," so that it may be understood: "in place of Judas," for he was elected in Judas's place by the apostles, when lots were cast to decide between two people. 22. Mark, "lofty in his mandate," especially for the Gospel of the Most High that he preached. 23. Luke, "the one who rises" or "the one lifting up" [because he lifted up the
preaching of the gospel after the others]. 24. Barnabas, "son of the prophet" or "son of consolation."
x. Other names in the Gospel (De reliquis in Evange- lio nominibus) 1. Mary, "she who illuminates" or "star of the sea (mare)," for she gave birth to the light of the world. Further, in Syrian speech 'Mary' means "mis- tress" - and beautifully - for she gave birth to the Lord.
2. Elizabeth, "fullness of my God" or "oath of my God."
3. Magdalene, "tower." Martha, "one who incites" or "one who provokes," and in Syrian speech it means "one who dominates." 4. Nathanael, "gift of God" [because by the gift of God there was no guile, that is, pretense, in him]. 5. Zebedee, "the one granted" or "the one who flows." Zacchaeus, "the just one" or "the justified one" or "the one who should be justified." It is a Syrian, not Hebrew, name. 6. Lazarus, "the one helped" [because he was resuscitated from death]. Herod, "the hairy one' or 'the vainglorious one."
7. Caiaphas, "the investigator" or "the shrewd one" or "he who vomits from the mouth" - for wickedly he condemned the righteous one with his mouth, although he had announced this by a prophetic mystery. 8. Pon- tius, "he who shuns counsel," especially that of the Jews, for, taking water, he washed his hands, saying (Matthew 27:24), "I am innocent of the blood of this just man."
9. Pilate, "mouth of the hammerer" [because when he both justified and condemned Christ with his mouth, he struck on both sides in the manner of a hammerer].
10. Barabbas, "son of their teacher," doubtless "of the teacher of the Jews," who is the devil, the instigator of the murderers, who reigns among them still today.
xi. Martyrs (De martyribus) 1. 'Martyrs' (martyr) in the Greek language (i.e. µ?ptUp) are called 'witnesses' (testis) in Latin, whence 'testimonials' are called martyria in Greek. And they are called witnesses because for their witness (testimonium) of Christ they suffered their pas- sions and struggled for truth even to the point of death.
2. But because we call them not testes, which we certainly could do, using the Latin term, but rather 'martyrs' in the Greek, this Greek word sounds quite familiar in the ears of the Church, as do many Greek terms that we use in place of Latin.
3. The first martyr in the New Testament was Stephen, whose name in Hebrew speech is interpreted "standard," because in his martyrdom he was the first standard for
the imitation of the faithful. The same name is rendered from the Greek tongue into Latin as "the crowned one," and this by way of prophecy, because through a cer- tain foreseeing of the future his name signified before- hand what would come to pass, for he suffered, and what he was called, he received. Thus 'Stephen' means "crown"; he was in humility stoned, but in sublimity crowned.
4. Further there are two kinds of martyr: one in mani- fest passion, the other in hidden valor of the soul. Indeed, many people, suffering the snares of the enemy and resisting all carnal desires, because they sacrificed them- selves in their hearts for almighty God, became martyrs even in times of peace - those indeed who, if a period of persecution had occurred, could have been martyrs.
xii. Clerics (De clericis) 1. The clergy (clerus) and cler- ics (clericus) are so called because Matthias, who as we read was the first person ordained by the apostles, was chosen by lot - for m2?poç in Greek means "allotment" or "inheritance." 2. Therefore they are called clerics because they are of the allotment of the Lord, or because they have a portion of the Lord. And in general all who serve in the Church of Christ are named 'clerics.' Their ranks and names are these: 3. doorkeeper (ostiarius), psalmist (psalmista), reader (lector), exorcist (exorcista), acolyte (acolythus), subdeacon (subdiaconus), deacon (diaconus), priest (presbyter), bishop (episcopus).
4. The order of bishops is fourfold, that is, of patri- archs, archbishops, metropolitans, and bishops (patriar- cha, archiepiscopus, metropolitanus, episcopus). 5. 'Patri- arch' in the Greek language means "chief of the fathers," because he holds the chief, that is, the apostolic place. And therefore, because he is employed in the office of highest honor, he is judged worthy of such a name as the 'Roman' or 'Antiochene' or 'Alexandrian' patriarch.
6. 'Archbishop' is so named with a Greek term because he is "highest of the bishops," for he holds an apostle's place and presides over metropolitans as well as other bishops. 7. ['Metropolitan' is so called from "the mea- sure of cities."] Archbishops are placed above the several provinces, and other priests are subject to their author- ity and doctrine, and without them the other bishops may do nothing; indeed the care of the whole province is committed to archbishops.
8. Moreover, all the orders designated above are named by one and the same term, 'bishop,' but beyond
that some use a particular name to distinguish the pow- ers that they have received individually. 9. Patriarch, "father of chiefs," for ?pyYv is 'chief.' 10. Archbishop, "chief of bishops." Metropolitan. 11. Further, the term
'episcopacy' (episcopatus) is so called because he who is placed over it has oversight (superintendere), exer- cising pastoral care, that is, over his subjects, for the term omop?±v in Latin means "watch over" (intendere).
12. 'Bishop,' then, in Greek, means "overseer" (specula- tor) in Latin, for he is set over the Church as an overseer. He is so called because he keeps watch (speculari), and oversees (praespicere) the behavior and lives of the peo- ple placed under him.
13. The 'pontifex' is the chief of priests, as if the word were 'the way' of his followers. And he is also named the 'highest priest' and the pontifex maximus, for he cre- ates priests and levites (i.e. deacons); he himself disposes all the ecclesiastical orders; he indicates what each one should do. 14. Indeed, in former times pontifexes were also kings, for this was the custom of our ancestors, that the king was himself a priest or pontifex - hence the Roman emperors were also called pontifexes.
15. Vates are so called from 'force of mind' (vis mentis), and the meaning of the word is manifold, for now it means "priest," now "prophet," now "poet." 16.A 'high priest' (antistes sacerdos) is so called because he 'stands before' (ante stare), for he is first in the hierarchy of the Church, and he has no one above him.
17. A priest (sacerdos) has a name compounded of Greek and Latin, as it were 'one who gives a holy thing' (sacrum dans), for as king (rex) is named from 'ruling' (regere), so priest from 'making sacrifice' (sacrificare) - for he consecrates (consecrare) and sanctifies (sancti- ficare). 18. Further, priests of the gentiles were called flamens. They wore on their heads a felt cap (pilleus), and on top of this there was a short stick holding a piece of wool. Because they could not bear it in the heat, they began to bind their heads with a fillet only, 19. for it was an abomination for them to go about with a completely bare head. Hence from the fillet (filum) that they used they were called flamens (flamen, plural flamines), as if it were filamines. But on feast days, with the fillet laid aside they would put on the pilleus out of respect for the eminence of their priesthood.
20. 'Priest' (presbyter) in Greek is interpreted "elder" (senior) in Latin. They are named elders not because of their age, or their exhausted senility, but rather for the honor and status that they have received. 21. Elders (pres- byter) are also called priests (sacerdos), because they per- form the sacraments (sacrum dare), as do bishops; but although they are priests (sacerdos) they do not have the highest honor of the pontificate, for they neither mark the brow with chrism nor give the Spirit, the Comforter, which a reading of the Acts of the Apostles shows may be done by bishops only. Whence, among the ancients, bish- ops and priests (presbyter) were the same, for the former name is associated with rank, the latter with seniority.
22. Levites were named after their originator, for the levites descended from Levi, and by them the ministries of the mystic sacraments were performed in the Temple of God. In Greek these are called deacons (diaconus), in Latin ministers (minister), for just as sacerdos is related to 'consecration (consecratio), diaconus (cf. 6tamov?±v, "minister," "do service") is related to 'dispensing of ser- vice' (ministerii dispensatio). 23. Hypodiacones in Greek are what we call subdeacons (subdiaconus), who are so called because they are subject to the regulations and offices of levites. They receive offerings from the faithful in the Temple of God, and bring them to the levites for placing on the altars. In Hebrew they are called Natha- nians (Nathaneus).
24. Readers (lector) are named from 'reading' (leg- ere, ppl. lectus) and psalmists (psalmista) from singing psalms, for the former pronounce to the people what they should follow, and the latter sing to kindle the spir- its of their audience to compunction - although some readers also declaim in so heart-rending a way that they drive some people to sorrow and lamentation. 25. These same people are also called 'announcers' (pronuntiator) because they announce from far away (porro adnun- tiare), for their voice will be so loud and clear that they fill the ears even of those placed far away.
26. Further, a chanter (cantor) is so called because he modulates his voice in singing (cantus). There are said to be two types of chanter in the art of music, corre- sponding with the names learned people have been able to give them in Latin, the precentor (praecentor) and the succentor (succentor). 27. The precentor is so called, naturally, because he leads the singing; the succentor because he follows in response. 28. We also speak of a co-chanter (concentor), one who 'sings at the same time'
(consonare), but he who sings at the same time but does not 'sing jointly' (concinere) willnot be called co-chanter.
29. 'Acolytes' (acolythus) in Greek are called torch- bearers (ceroferarius) in Latin, from their carrying can- dles (cereus) when the Gospel is to be read or mass is to be offered. 30. For at that time lights are kindled and car- ried by them, not in order to put darkness to flight, since at the same time there is daylight, but in order to display a symbol of joy, so that under the figure of the physi- cal candlelight that light may be displayed concerning which it is read in the Gospel (John 1:9), "That was the true light, which enlighteneth every man that cometh into this world."
31. 'Exorcists' (exorcista) are rendered from Greek into Latin as "swearers" (adiurans) or "rebukers," for they invoke, upon the catechumens or upon those who have an unclean spirit, the name of the Lord Jesus, swearing (adiurare) through him that it may depart from them.
32. Doorkeepers are the same as porters (ianitor), who in the Old Testament were chosen to guard the Temple, lest someone unclean in any way should enter it. They are called doorkeepers (ostiarius) because they are present at the doors (ostium) of the Temple. 33. Keeping the key, they watch over everything inside and out, and making judgment between the good and the bad they receive the faithful and reject the unfaithful.
xiii. Monks (De monachis) 1. The term 'monk' (monachus) has a Greek etymology, because a monk is alone (singularis), for µov?ç in Greek means "oneness" (singularitas). Therefore if the word for monk means 'a solitary' (solitarius), what is someone who is alone (solus) doing in a crowd? There are, however, several kinds of monks. 2. Cenobites (coenobita), whom we can call those living 'in a community' (incommune), because a convent (coenobium) is of several people. 3. Anchorites (anchorita) are those who after a community life seek out deserted places and live alone in the wilderness. Because they withdraw far from people (cf. ?vayYp?±v, "with- draw") they are named with this name. Anchorites imi- tate Elijah and John (the Baptist), cenobites imitate the apostles. 4. Hermits (eremita) are also anchorites who, removed (removere, ppl. remotus) from the gaze of peo- ple, seek out the desert (eremum) and deserted solitary places, for the term eremum is used as if it were 'remote'
(remotum). 5. Abbot (abba), moreover, a Syriac term, signifies "father" in Latin, as Paul made clear in writing to the Romans (8:15), "Whereby we cry: Abba, Father," having used two languages for the one name, for he says "Father" with the Syriac word abba, and then again names the same person in Latin, Pater.
xiv. Other faithful people (De ceteris fidelibus)
1. 'Christian' (Christianus), as the meaning of the word indicates, is derived from 'unction' (unctio) or from the name of their originator and creator. Now Christians are surnamed from Christ, as Jews (Iudaei) from Judah (Iuda). Indeed, the surnames of adherents have been given from the name of their teacher. 2. Further, Chris- tians were formerly called Nazarenes (Nazaraeus) by the Jews as if in opprobrium, because our Lord and Sav- ior was called 'the Nazarene' after a certain township of Galilee. 3. Let no one glorify himself as a Christian, how- ever, who has the name and does not have the deeds. But where the name accords with one's work, most surely that person is a Christian, because he shows himself to be a Christian by his deeds, one who walks as Christ walked, from whom he took the name.
4. 'Catholic' (catholicus) means "universal" or "general," for the Greeks call the universal ma9o2tmóç.
5. An 'orthodox person' (orthodoxus) is one who believes rightfully, and who lives [righteously] as he believes. Now òp9?ç in Greek means "rightly" (recte), 6ó(a is "good repute" (gloria): an orthodox person is a man "of good and right repute" (recta gloria). He who lives oth- erwise than as he believes cannot be called by this name.
6. 'Neophyte' (neophytus) from the Greek can be translated into Latin as "a new beginner" and "of uncul- tivated faith" or "one recently born again." 7.A catechu- men is so called because he is still hearing (audire) the teaching of the faith, and has not yet received baptism, for mat?yoáµ?voç in Greek means "auditor." 8. A 'fit seeker' (competens) is so called because after instruction in the faith he 'fitly seeks' (competere) the grace of Christ; hence from 'seeking' (petere) they are called 'fit seekers.'
9. 'Lay' (laicus) means "of the people" (popularis), for 2aóç in Greek means "people" (populus). 10. 'Proselyte' (proselytus)- that is, one who is a foreigner and circum- cised, who is mixed in with the people of God - is a Greek term.
