The learned body of knowledge that contemplates abstract quantities is called mathematics (mathematica) in Latin. An abstract (abstractus) quantity is something that we investigate (tractare) by reasoning alone, sepa- rating it by means of the intellect from matter or from accidental qualities such as even and odd, and other things of this kind. There are four types of mathemat- ics, namely, Arithmetic (arithmetica), Music (musica), Geometry (geometria), and Astronomy (astronomia). Arithmetic is the study of numeric quantity in and of itself. Music is the study that is occupied with the num- bers that are found in sounds. Geometry is the study of size and shapes. Astronomy is the study that contem- plates the course of the heavenly bodies and all the figures and positions of the stars. We will cover these studies, each in turn, a little more fully, so that their principles can be suitably shown.
i. Words belonging to the study of arithmetic (De vocabulo arithmeticae disciplinae) 1. Arithmetic (arithmetica) is the study of numbers, for the Greeks call numbers (numerus) ?pt9µóç. The writers of secular literature would have this discipline be the first among the mathematical disciplines, as this discipline relies on no other for its existence. 2. However, music, geome- try, and astronomy, which follow arithmetic, require its support in order to exist and hold their place.
ii. Originators of mathematics (De auctoribus eius) People say that Pythagoras was the first among the Greeks to commit the study of numbers to writing.
Next, the subject was laid out more broadly by Nico- machus. Among the Latin speakers, first Apuleius and then Boethius translated mathematical works.
iii. What a number is (Quid sit numerus) 1.A number is a quantity that is made of units (unitas), for 'one' is the germ of number, but not a number itself. The term 'coin' (nummus) gave its name to 'number' (numerus) and from its pervasiveness, it bestowed the name. 'One' (unus) draws its name from Greek; for the Greeks call one ?³ç (neuter sv). Thus it is for 'two' (duo) and 'three' (tres), which the Greeks call 6áo and tp(c)a. 2. 'Four' (quattuor) takes up its name from the square (quadratus), but 'five' (quinque) did not take its name from nature, but rather from the arbitrary will of the one who bestowed the names upon numbers. 'Six' (sex) and 'seven' (septem) come from the Greek. 3. For we pronounce an s instead of the rough breathing sound (i.e. the h-sound) in many words that are aspirated in Greek. Thus, we have sex for s( and septem for spt?, just as we say serpillum (i.e. a type of thyme) for the herb herpillum. But 'eight' (octo) is a direct translation, as we and the Greeks say it the same way. Similarly, they say svvsa, we say novem (i.e. 'nine'); they say 6sma and we say decem (i.e. 'ten').
4. Now 'ten' is said to derive from a Greek etymology, because it binds and conjoins numbers that lie below it, for 6?oµóç ("bond") means to conjoin or to bind. Furthermore, 'twenty' (viginti) is so called because ten 'occurs twice' (bis geniti), with the letter v put in place of the b. 'Thirty' (triginta) is so called because it arises (gignere) from three (ternarius) tens, and so it goes up to 'ninety' (nonaginta). 5. 'One hundred' (centum) is so called from 'iron wheel-tire' (canthus) because it is circular; 'two hundred' (ducenti) comes from 'two one- hundreds' (duo centum). Thus it is for the remaining
numbers up to one thousand. 'One thousand' (mille) comes from 'great number' (multitudo), and whence also 'the military' (militia), as if the word were multitia; and whence also 'thousands' (milia), which the Greeks call myriada (i.e. "myriads"), with letters changed.
iv. What numbers do for us (Quid praestent numeri)
1. The reckoning of numbers ought not to be despised, for in many passages of sacred writings it elucidates how great a mystery they hold. Not for nothing it is said in praise of God (Wisdom 11:21), "Thou hast ordered all things in measure, and number (numerus), and weight."
2. The [number] that contains six units (senarius), which is perfect in its own parts, declares the completion of the world by a certain signification of its number. Likewise for the forty days during which Moses and Elijah and the Lord himself fasted: without an understanding of numbers, the span of days is unintelligible.
3. So also there are other numbers in the Sacred Scriptures whose figurative meaning cannot be resolved except by those skilled in the knowledge of the mathe- matical art. It is even our lot to depend on the discipline of numbers to some extent when through it we name the hours, when we dispute about the course of the months, and when we recognize the duration of the turning year.
4. Indeed, through numbers, we are provided with the means to avoid confusion. Remove numbers from all things, and everything perishes. Take away the compu- tation of time, and blind ignorance embraces all things; those who are ignorant of the method of calculation cannot be differentiated from the other animals.
v. The first division, of even and odd numbers (De prima divisione parium et inparium) 1. Numbers are divided into even (pars) and odd (impars) numbers. Even numbers are subdivided into these categories: evenly even, evenly odd, and oddly even. Odd num- bers are subdivided into these categories: the primary and simple; the secondary and compound; and the ter- tiary and mean, which in a certain way is primary and non-compound, but in another way is secondary and compound.
2. An even number is one that can be divided into two equal parts, like 2, 4, and 8. On the other hand, an odd number is one that cannot be divided into equal parts, since there is one in the middle (i.e. of the two equal parts) that is either lacking or superfluous, like 3,
5, 7, 9 and so on. 3. An evenly (pariter) even number is one that is divided equally into even numbers until it reaches the indivisible unity, as, for example, 64 has 32 at its midpoint; 32 has 16, 16 has 8, 8 has 4, 4 has 2, 2 has 1, which is an indivisible singularity.
4. An evenly odd number is one that can undergo a division into equal parts, but then its parts cannot imme- diately be evenly dissected, like 6, 10, 38, 50. As soon as you divide this kind of number, you run into a number that you cannot cut evenly. 5. An oddly (impariter) even number is one whose parts can be divided equally, but the division does not go to the point of one (unitas), like 24. This number can be divided in half, making 12, and 12 can be divided in half, making 6, and then 6 can be divided in half, making 3. This last section cannot undergo further division, but rather there is a termina- tion that you cannot cut before reaching number one.
6. An oddly odd number is one which is divided by an odd number an odd number of times, like 25 and 49. While these numbers are odd, they are divided into an odd number of parts, so that 49 is seven sevens, and 25 is five fives.
Some odd numbers are simple, some are compound, and some are mean (mediocris). 7. Simple odd numbers (i.e. prime numbers) are those that hold no other part except the number one alone, as for example the number 3, which holds only 3, and the number 5, which holds only 5, and the number 7, which holds only 7. These numbers have only a single part (i.e. factor). Compound num- bers are those that are divided not only by the number one, but are also generated from another number - such numbers as 9, 15, and 21. So we speak of 3 times 3, or 7
times 3, or 3 times 5, or 5 times 5.
8. Mean numbers are those that seem to be simple and non-compound numbers in one way, but compound numbers in another. For example, when 9 is compared to 25, it is primary and not compound, because there is no number that divides into both 9 and 25 except the number one only. But if 9 is compared to 15, it is secondary and compound, since there is present in 15
a shared number besides the number one, that is, the number three, for 9 is 3 times 3 and 15 is 3 times 5.
9. Furthermore, some of the even numbers are 'super- fluous,' some are 'diminutive,' and some are 'perfect.' Superfluous (superfluus) numbers are those whose parts exceed their own total when added together, as for exam- ple, 12. 12 has 5 parts: 1, which occurs 12 times; 2, which
occurs 6 times; 3, which occurs 4 times; 4, which occurs
3 times; and 6, which occurs twice. Now 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 added together make 16, which by far surpasses 12. Thus it is for 12 and most other numbers similar to it, like 18, and many others. 10. Diminutive (diminutivus) numbers are those which, when computation is made of their parts, render a sum less than the total number, such as 10, which has 3 parts: 1, which occurs 10 times; 2,
which occurs 5 times; and 5, which occurs twice. 1 and 2 and 5 added together make 8, well less than 10. Similar to 10 is the number 8, or many other numbers which, when their parts are added together, stop short of the number itself.
11. A perfect (perfectus) number is one that is com- pletely filled up by its own parts, as, for example, 6, for it has 3 parts: 6, 3, and 2. The part that occurs 6 times is 1, the part that occurs 3 times is 2, and the part that occurs 2 times is 3. When these parts are added together, that is, when 1, 2, and 3 are summed up together, they make (perficere, ppl. perfectus) the number 6. Perfect numbers that occur within 10 include 6; within 100, 28; and within
1000, 496.
vi. The second division of all numbers (De secunda divisione totius numeri) 1. Every number can be regarded either with respect to itself, or with respect to another number. The latter are divided thus: some numbers are equal, others are unequal. The latter are also divided this way: some are major, and some are minor. Major numbers are divided thus: multiples (mul- tiplex), superparticulars (superparticularis), superpar- tients (superpartiens), multiple superparticulars, and multiple superpartients. Minor numbers are divided thus: submultiples, subsuperparticulars, subsuperpar- tients, submultiple subsuperparticulars, and submulti- ple subsuperpartients.
2. A number that is taken into account per se is one that is discussed without any sort of relationship, like 3, 4, 5, 6, and so on. A number that is taken into account with respect to another number is one that is compared
relative to the other number, as, for example, when 4 is compared to 2, it is called 'duplex' (duplex) [and mul- tiple (multiplex)], or when 6 is compared to 3, or 8 to 4, or 10 to 5. Again, when 3 is compared to 1, it is called 'triplex' (triplex), or when 6 is compared to 2, or 9 to 3, and so on. 3. Numbers that are equal with respect to quantity are called 'equal' (aequalis), as, for example, when 2 is compared to 2, 3 to 3, 10 to 10, and 100 to
100. 'Unequal' (inaequalis) numbers are those that show inequality when compared to another number, as when 3 is compared to 2, 4 to 3, 5 to 4, and 10 to 6. At all times, whenever a major number is compared to a minor num- ber, or when a minor number is compared to a major number, it is said to be 'unequal.'
4.A major (maior) number is one that contains within itself the minor number to which it is compared, and something more, as for example, the number 5 is greater than the number 3, because the number 5 contains within itself the number 3 and two of its parts; and so it is for other such cases. 5. [A minor (minor) number is one that is contained by a major number, to which it is compared, along with some portion of itself, as when the number 3 is compared to the number 5. The number 3 is contained by 5, along with two parts of 3.] A multiple (multiplex) number is one that has within itself a minor number twice, or three times, or four, or a multiple number of times (multipliciter). Forexample, when 2 is compared to 1, it is duplex; 3 compared to one is triplex; fourcompared to one is quadruplex, and so on.
6. Opposite to this is the submultiple (submultiplex), a number that is contained within a multiple number twice, or three times, or four times, or a multiple num- ber of times. For example, 1 is contained by 2 twice, by 3 three times, by 4 four times, by 5 five times, and by other numbers a multiple number of times. 7. A superpartic- ular (superparticularis) number is one that, while being the greater number, contains within itself a lesser num- ber, to which it is compared, and one part of the lesser number in addition. For example, when 3 is compared to 2, 3 contains within itself 2 and one other part that is half of 2; or when 4 is compared to 3, 4 contains in itself 3, and one other part, which is a third of 3. Again, when 5 is compared to 4, 5 has within itself the number 4, and one other number, which is said to be a fourth of the number 4, and so on with other numbers.
8.A superpartient (superpartiens) number is one that contains an entire lesser number within itself, and has
beyond this 2, or 3, or 4, or 5, or more parts of the lesser number. For example, when 5 is compared to 3, the num- ber 5 has within itself the number 3, and, in addition, two parts of 3. When 7 is compared to 4, 7 has in itself 4, and
three other parts of 4; when 9 is compared to 5, 9 has within itself 5 and four other parts of 5. 9.A subsuperpar- tient (subsuperpartiens) number is one that is contained within a superpartient number, along with two or three or more of its own parts. For example, 3 is contained by 5 along with two other parts of 3; 5 is contained by 9 along with four other parts of 5.
10. A subsuperparticular number is a minor number that is contained within a greater number along with one other part of itself - whether a half, or a third, or a fourth, or a fifth; as, for example, when 2 is compared to 3, or 3 to 4, or 4 to 5, and so on. 11.A multiple superpar- ticular number is one that, when compared to a number less than itself, contains with itself the entire lesser num- ber multiple times, along with another part of the lesser number. For example, when 5 is compared to 2, 5 con- tains within itself 2 two times, making 4, along with one part of 2; when 9 is compared to 4, 9 contains within itself 4 two times, making 8, and one other part of 4.
12. [A submultiple [sub]superparticular number is one that, when compared to a number greater than itself, is contained by that number a multiple of times along with one other part of itself; as for example, when 2 is compared to 5, 2 is contained by 5 two times, along with one part of 2.]
A multiple superpartional (superpartionalis) number is one that, when compared to a number less than itself, contains the lesser number a multiple number of times along with some other parts of the lesser number. For example, when 8 is compared to 3, 8 contains within itself 3 two times, plus two other parts of 3. When 14 is compared to 6, 14 contains 6 within itself two times, plus two other parts of 6; [when 16 is compared to 7, 16 contains 7 twice, plus two other parts of 7; when 21 is compared to 9, it contains 9 within itself twice, plus three other parts of 9].
13. A submultiple superpartional number is one which, when compared to a number greater than itself, is contained by that number a multiple number of times, together with some other parts of itself. For example, when 3 is compared to 8, 3 is contained by 8 two times, plus two parts of 3; when 4 is compared to 11, 4 is con- tained two times, plus three parts of 4.
vii. 
The third division of all numbers (De tertia divi- sione totius numeri) 1. Numbers are either discrete, or continuous. Continuous numbers are divided into linear (linealis), planar (superficialis), or solid (solidus) num- bers. A discrete (discretus) number is one that is of sep- arate (discretus) units, as for example 3, 4, 5, 6, and so on. 2. A continuous (continens) number is one that is composed of conjoined units, [as], for example, when the number 3 is understood in terms of its magnitude, that is, in its linear dimension, or is said to be contain- ing (continens) either a space or a solid; likewise for the numbers 4 or 5.
3. A linear (linealis) number is one that begins from the
number one and is written in a linear fashion (linealiter) up to infinity. Whence the letter alpha is used to mark the measure of lines, since this letter signifies 'one' among the Greeks (a figure follows in manuscript). 
4. A planar (superficalis) number is one that is com- posed not only of length, but also of breadth, such as the triangular, quadrangular, pentagonal, or circular num- bers, and so on, which always exist in a flat (planus) region, that is, a surface (superficies). Thus the trian- gular number: (a figure follows in manuscript). Thus the quadrangular number: (fig.). Thus the pentagonal: (fig.). 5. Thus the circular number (i.e. the square of a number), which, since it has been multiplied by like numbers, begins from itself and turns back to itself, as for example 5 times 5 is 25, thus: (fig.).
A solid (solidus) number is one that is consists of length, breadth, and height, like pyramids, which rise up in the manner of a flame: (fig.). 6. Cubes (cubus) are, for example, like dice: (fig.). Spheres (sphaera) have an equal roundness on all sides: (fig.). A spherical number (i.e. the cube of a number) is one that, when multiplied by a circular number, begins from itself and turns back to itself. For example, 5 times 5 is 25. When this circular number is multiplied on itself, it makes a sphere, that is, 5 times 25 is 125.
viii. The differences between arithmetic, geometry, and music (De differentia arithmeticae, geometriae et musicae) 1. There are differences between arithmetic, geometry, and music, in the way that you discover their
means. First, you seek out means in arithmetic in this manner. You add together a low and a high number, you divide them, and you find the mean; take, for exam- ple, the low and high numbers 6 and 12: when you join them, they make 18; you divide this at its mid- point, and you make 9, which is an arithmetic propor- tion, in that the mean exceeds the low number by as many units as the mean is exceeded by the high num- ber. Now 9 exceeds 6 by 3, and 9 is exceeded by 12 by the same amount. 2. But you seek out means in geome- try in this way. The beginning and end numbers, when they are multiplied, make as much as the double of their means. Take, for example, 6 and 12. When multiplied, they make 72, and their means, 8 and 9, when multi- plied make the same amount. 3. Next, you seek out the means for music in this way. By whatever part the mean exceeds the low number, by the same part the mean is exceeded by the high number. Take, for example, 6 and 8. 8 exceeds 6 by two parts, and these two parts are the third midpoint, [8], which is exceeded by the final ninth.7
ix. How many infinite numbers exist (Quot numeri infiniti existunt) 1. It is quite certain that numbers are 'without limit' (infinitus), since at whatever number you think the limit has been reached, that same number can be increased - not, I say, by the addition of only one, but however large it is, and however huge a number it contains, by reason and by the science of numbers it can be not only doubled, but even further multiplied. 2. Yet each number is so bounded by its own properties that none of them can be equal to any other. Therefore, num- bers are unlike and varied among themselves, and each one in itself is bounded (finitus), but taken all together they are unbounded (infinitus).
x. 
The inventors of geometry, and its name (De inven- toribus geometriae et vocabulo eius) 1. It is said that the discipline of geometry was first discovered by the Egyp- tians, because, when the Nile River flooded and every- one's possessions were covered with mud, the onset of dividing the earth by means of lines and measures gave a name to the skill. And thereupon, when it was greatly perfected by the acumen of wise men, the expanses of the sea, sky, and air were measured. 2. Stimulated by their zeal, these sages began, after they had measured the land, to inquire about the region of the sky, as to how far the moon is from the earth, and even the sun from the moon; and how great a distance there is to the pinnacle of the heavens. And so, using reasoning capable of being tested and proved, they determined the distances of the vault of heaven and the perime- ter of the earth in terms of the number of stadia. 3. But because the discipline began with measuring the earth, it retained its name from its origin, for geometry (geome- tria) takes its name from 'earth' and 'measure.' In Greek, 'earth' is called y? and 'measure' is µstpa. The art of this discipline is concerned with lines, distances, sizes and shapes, and the dimensions and numbers found in shapes.
xi. The fourfold division of geometry (De quadriper- tita divisione geometriae) 1. Geometry is divided into four parts: planes (planus), numeric size (magnitudo numerabilis), rational size (magnitudo rationalis), and solid figures (figura solida). 2. Planar figures are those that have length and breadth and are, following Plato, five in number. Numeric size is that which can be divided by the numbers of arithmetic. 3. Rational sizes are those whose measures we are able to know, but irra- tional sizes are those the quantity of whose measures cannot be known.
xii. Geometrical figures (De figuris geometriae) 1. Solid figures are those that are composed of length, breadth, and height, as for example the cube (cubus). There are five types of figures that exist on a plane. A circle (circulus) is the first of the planar figures, and it is so called from going around (circumducere). It has a point in its middle, on which everything centers, which people call the geometric center, and which Latin speak- ers call the 'point of the circle' (punctus circuli) (a figure follows). 2. A four-sided figure on a plane is called a
quadrilateral (quadrilaterus) figure. It lies within four straight lines, thus (fig.). A dianatheton grammon is the plane figure [thus]: (fig.). An orthogonium (cf. òp9óç, "right"; yYv(c)a, "angle") is a plane figure with a right angle (fig.). It is a triangle (triangulus), and it hasa right angle.
An isopleuros (cf. ­ooç, "equal"; p2?Up?, "side") is a plane figure; it is upright and constructed from its base (fig.; apparently an isosceles or equilateral triangle). 3.A sphere (sphaera) is a figure fashioned in the round, with all parts equal (fig.). A cube (cubus) is, properly, a solid figure that consists of length, breadth, and height (fig.).
4. A cylinder (cylindrus) is a four-sided figure having a semicircular upper part (fig.). 5. A cone (conon) is a figure that from a wide base narrows at the top, just like the orthogonium (fig.). 6. A pyramid (pyramidis) is a figure that rises up from a wide base to a point, like a tongue of fire, for 'fire' is called pup among the Greeks (fig.). 7. Just as every number is within 10, so the perimeter of every figure is enclosed within the circle (fig.). 
The first figure of this art is the point (punctus), which has no parts. The second figure is the line (linea), a length without breadth. A straight (rectus) line is one that lies evenly along its points. A plane (superficies) has length and breadth only. The boundaries of planes are lines. The forms of these are not placed in the preceding ten figures, because they are found among them. 
xiii. Geometric numbers (De numeris geometricae) You seek out numbers according to geometry in this way. Beginning and end numbers, when they are multiplied, make as much as the double of their means. Take, for example, 6 and 12. When multiplied, they make 72, and their means 8 and 9 when multiplied make the same amount (see viii.2 above).
[xiv. Exposition of figures illustrated below (Expositio figurarum infra scriptarum) 1. Likewise, one account concerning the motion of stars is gathered together in eight figures. These are the diametric (diametrus), or quadratic (quadratus, i.e. tetragonal), or triangular (trigonus), or hexagonal (hexagonus), or asyndetic (asyn- detus), or coincident (simul), or circumferent (circum- ferre), that is, they are either 'carry to a higher degree' (superferre) or 'are carried.' Diagonals occur when five constellations intervene. Tetragonals (tetragonus) occur
when two constellations intervene. Hexagonals occur when there is one. Asyndetic figures occur when no constellations intervene. Coincident figures occur when they are in the same small area. Figures 'carry to a higher degree' when they overtake another figure, or cause an action. Figures are 'carried to a higher degree' when they precede others. 2. Triangular figures occur when there are three intervening (constellations). Again, according to another account, there are eight differentiae, namely, the constellation (signum), its parts (pars), its bound- aries (finis), by the way it is assembled (conventus), by its retrograde or straight paths, its latitude, and its lon- gitude.
3. The calculation of interior shapes. This kind of inquiry concerning this point may arise. Although in the sequence of numbers 8 is prior, here one puts 9 first, since in the logic of arithmetic or geometry 8 is more
than 9, for 8 is a cube (cubus) or a solid, that is, it is a body of which one can find no more, but 9 is a plane (superficies), that is, it is a thing that is not filled out; rather, it lacks perfection. 4. Here two cubes, that is, two solidities, are found in this manner. The number six is the first perfect number (see v.11 above); for it is divisible into equal numbers, so: divide by one, six parts; into three parts by two - three twos are six; in half, that is three two times, is six. You will find another
perfect number that you may divide by equal numbers in this way, which accords with the preceding instance.
5. Within the first numeric order, that is, within 10, on account of its being the first perfect number, multiplying with the first turn sixes nine times gives 54; nines six times, 54. The material makes so many parts and it is known to have had so many parts not without reason, by twos, and from this it has one in an order such as this: 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 8 and other numbers, including 27.]
Music (De musica)
xiv. Music and its name (De musica et eius nomine) 
1. Music (musica) is the practical knowledge of modula- tion (modulatio) and consists of sound and song. Music is so called through derivation from the word 'Muse,' for the Muses (Musae) were named from µ?oat, that is, from 'seeking',18 because it was through them, as the ancients would have it, that the power of song and the modula- tion of the voice were sought. 2. Their sound, because it is something perceived by the senses, vanishes as the moment passes and is imprinted in the memory. Whence came the invention of the poets that the Muses are the daughters of Jupiter and Memory, for unless sounds are held by the memory of man, they perish, because they cannot be written down.
xv. The inventors of music (De inventoribus eius) 1. Moses says that Tubal, who was of the stock of Cain before the Flood, was the discoverer of the musical art. But the Greeks say that Pythagoras discovered the ele- ments of this art from the sound of hammers and from the striking of taut strings. Others hand down the story that Linus the Theban and Zetus and Amphion were the first to become famous in the musical art. 2. After them, little by little, this discipline especially was regu-
lated and augmented in many ways, and it became as shameful to be ignorant of music as it was shameful not to be able to read and write. Moreover, music was introduced not only in sacred rites, but also in all cel- ebrations, and in all joyful or sorrowful occasions. 3. Just as hymns were sung in veneration of the gods, there were also hymns to Hymen for weddings, dirges and laments at funerals, all accompanied by the flute. At ban- quets, a lyre orcithara was passed around, and a convivial type of song was performed by each reclining diner in turn.
xvi. The power of music (Quid possit musica) 1. So it is that without music, no other discipline can be per- fected, for nothing is without music. Indeed, it is said that the universe itself is composed from a certain har- mony of sounds, and that the very heavens turn to the modulations of harmony. Music rouses emotions, and it calls the senses to a different state. 2. In battle, too, the sounding of the trumpet inflames the fighters, and the more ardent its blast, the braver grows the spirit for the contest. Since song urges even rowers on, music also soothes the spirit so that it can endure toil, and the modulation of the voice eases exhaustion from individ- ual labors. 3. Music also calms excited spirits, just as one reads about David, who rescued Saul from the unclean spirit by the art of modulation. Music calls forth the very beasts to listen to its modulation, even serpents, birds, and dolphins. But further, however we speak, or how- ever we are moved by the internal pulsing of our veins - these things are demonstrably linked, through their musical rhythms, to the power of harmony.
xvii. The three parts of music (De tribus partibus musicae) 1. Music has three parts, that is, the harmonic (harmonicus), the rhythmic (rhythmicus), and the metric (metricus). The harmonic part is that which differenti- ates high and low sounds. The rhythmic part inquires about the impact of words, whether the sound agrees well or badly. 2. The metrical part is that which recog- nizes, by means of a demonstrable system, the measure of different meters, as for example the heroic, the iambic, the elegiac, and so on.
xviii. The threefold division of music (De triformi musicae divisione) 1. It is accepted that all sound, which is the material of song, has three forms by its nature. The first division is the harmonicus, which consists of vocal song. The second division is the organicus, which is composed of blowing. The third is the rhythmic (rhyth- micus), which takes its measures from the plucking of fingers. 2. For sound is emitted either by the voice, as through the throat, or by blowing, as through a trum- pet or a flute, or by plucking, as with the cithara, or any other sort of instrument that is melodious when plucked.
xix. The first division of music, which is called har- monic (De prima divisione musicae quae harmonica dicitur) 1. The first division of music, which is called harmonic (harmonicus), that is, the modulation of the voice, pertains to comedies, tragedies, or choruses, or to all who sing with their own voice. This makes a move- ment that comes from the mind and body together, and the movement produces a sound, and from this is formed the music that in humans is called 'voice' (vox). 2. Voice (vox) is air beaten (verberare) by breath, and from this also words (verbum) are named. Properly, voice is a human characteristic, or a characteristic of unreason- ing animals. But in some cases, with incorrect usage and improperly, a sound is called a 'voice,' as for example "the voice of the trumpet bellowed," and (Vergil, Aen. 3.556):
. . . and voices broken on the shore.
For the word proper to rocks on the shore is 'sound' (sonare). Also, (Vergil, Aen. 9.503):
But the trumpet far off (made) a terrible sound with its sonorous brass.
Harmonics (harmonica) is the modulation of the voice and the bringing of many sounds into agreement, or fitting them together. 3. Symphony (symphonia) is the blend of modulation made from low and high sounds in agreement with one another, either in voice, or blow- ing, or plucking. Through symphony, higher and lower voices are brought into harmony, so that whoever makes a dissonant sound offends the senses of the one hear- ing it. The opposite of symphony is diaphony (diapho- nia), that is, when voices are discrepant, or dissonant.
4. Euphony (euphonia) is sweetness of voice. This word and 'melody' (melos) take their names from sweetness and honey (mel). 5. Diastema (diastema) is the appropri- ate vocal interval between two or more sounds. 6. Diesis (diesis) refers to certain intervals that lead the modula- tion downward, and moving downward from one sound into another. 7. Tone (tonus) is the high enunciation of the voice. A tone (i.e. a modal scale) is also the varia- tion and quantity of a mode (harmonia) which consists of vocal accent and tenor. Musicians have divided the tones into fifteen kinds, of which the hyperlydian (i.e. hypolydian) is the last and highest, and the hypodorian is the lowest of all.
8. A song (cantus) is the voice changing pitch, for sound is even-pitched; and sound precedes song. 9. Arsis (arsis) is elevation of the voice, that is, the beginning. Thesis (thesis) is lowering the voice, that is, the end. 10. Sweet (suavis) voices are refined and compact, distinct and high. Clear (perspicuus) voices are those that are drawn out further, so that they continually fill whole spaces, like the blaring of trumpets. 11. Delicate (sub- tilis) voices are those that have no breath, like the voices of infants, women, and sick people, and like plucking on strings. Indeed, the most delicate are the strings of musical instruments, which emit light, refined sounds.
12. Voices are rich (pinguis) when a great deal of breath is sent forth all at once, like the voices of men. A high (acutus) voice is light, and elevated, just as we see in the strings of musical instruments. A hard (durus) voice is one that emits sounds violently, like thunder, or like the sound of the anvil, when the hammer strikes on the hard iron.
13.A harsh (asperus) voice is hoarse, and uttered with brief irregular beats. A blind (caecus) voice is one that stops short as soon as it is emitted, and being stifled is not prolonged any further, like the sound of clay utensils. A charming (vinnolus) voice is soft and flexible; and it is so named from vinnus, that is, 'softly modulated.' 14. A perfect (perfectus) voice is high, sweet, and distinct: high, so that it can reach the high range; distinct, so that it fills the ears; sweet, so that it soothes the spirits of the listeners. If a voice lacks any of these qualities, it is not perfect.
xx. The second division, which is called organicus (De secunda divisione, quae organica dicitur) 1. The sec- ond division is organicus, and it is produced by those instruments that, when they are filled with the breath that is blown into them, are animated with the sound of a voice, like trumpets, reed pipes, pipes, organs, pan- doria, and instruments similar to these. 2. Organum is the general word for all musical instruments. The Greeks call that instrument to which bellows are attached by a different name (i.e. u6paU2oç), but to call it an organ (organum) is rather the common usage of the Greeks.
3. The trumpet (tuba) was invented first by the Etr- uscans, about which Vergil says (Aen. 8.526):
And the Etruscan blaring of the trumpets (tuba) bellowed through the air.
Trumpets were employed not only for battles, but also for all festive days, thanks to their clarity in praise or joy. For this reason, the Psalter says (cf. Psalm 80:4, Vulgate), "Sing with a trumpet (tuba) at the onset of the month, on the noted day of your solemnity" - for it was commanded for the Jews to sound a trumpet at the onset of the new moon, and they do this even up to this day.
4. 
People say that flutes (tibia) were invented in Phry- gia. For a long time, they were used only at funeral rites, and soon after at other sacred rites of the pagans. More- over, people think that flutes were so named because at first they were fashioned from the leg-bones (tibia) of deer and the shin-bones of asses. Then, through incor- rect usage, they began to be called by this name even when they were not made of shin-bones or other bones. Thus we also get 'flute player' (tibicen), as if from tib- iarum cantus ("song of flutes").
5. 'Reed' (calamus, i.e. the reed plant, and also a name for a reed-pipe) is the particular name of a tree, and comes from 'rousing' (calere), that is, from 'pouring forth' voices. 6. Some people think that the fistula (lit. "pipe," also another name for a reed-pipe) was invented by Mercury, and others by Faunus, whom the Greeks call Pan. And not a few think that it was invented by Idis, a shepherd from Agrigentum in Sicily. The fistula is so named because it emits a voice, for voice is ??Ûç in Greek, and otó2ta is the word meaning 'sent forth.' 7. Among musicians, the sambuca isa type of symphonia. It is made of the kind of fragile wood from which flutes are constructed. 8. The pandorius took its name from its inventor, and Vergil says (cf. Ecl. 2.32):
Pan was the first to teach joining many reeds together with wax, Pan whose concern is the flock and the keepers of the flock.
For among the pagans, Pan was the pastoral god, who was the first to fit together reeds of different lengths for the purpose of song, and he put them together with diligent art.
xxi. The third division of music, which is called rhyth- mic (De tertia divisione, quae rythmica nuncupatur)
1. The third division of music is called 'rhythmic' (rhyth- micus), and it pertains to strings and percussion. Dif- ferent types of cithara belong to this division, and also drums, cymbals, rattles, and bronze and silver vessels, and others that when struck produce a sweet ringing sound from the hardness of their metal, as well as other instruments of this sort.
2. Tubal is reputed to have been the discoverer of the cithara and the psaltery, as was mentioned above. However, according to the opinion of the Greeks it is believed that the use of the cithara was discovered by Apollo. The shape of the cithara is said to have been
similar to the human chest at first, so that song might be brought forth from the cithara as the voice is brought forth from the chest, and they say it was named for this same reason. 3. For in the language of the Dorian Greeks the chest is called mt9?pa. Little by little, many types of these instruments came into existence, such as psalter- ies, lyres, barbitons, phoenices and pectides, and those types called Indian, which are plucked by two perform- ers at the same time. Some are made one way, and some another, with either a four-sided or triangular shape. 4. Indeed, the number of strings multiplied, and types were changed as well. The ancients called the cithara fidicula or fidicen, because the strings of this instrument agreed together among themselves in the same way as happens among those who have trust (fides). The cithara in antiq- uity had seven strings. Whence it is said in Vergil (Aen. 6.646):
. . . the seven different notes.
5. Vergil speaks of differences because no string gives a sound like that of the neighboring string. But there are seven strings either because they fill out the entire vocal range, or because heaven resonates with seven motions.
6. Strings (chorda) are so called from 'heart' (cor, gen. cordis) because the throbbing of the strings in the cithara is like the throbbing of the heart in the chest. Mercury contrived them first, and he was the first to pluck sound from musical strings. 7. The psaltery (psalterium), which is commonly called canticum (lit. "song"), takes its name from 'singing to the psaltery' (psallere), because the cho- rus responds in harmony with the voice of the psaltery. It has a characteristic shared with the foreign cithara, being in the shape of the letter delta; but there is this difference between the psaltery and the cithara, that the psaltery has the hollowed wooden box from which the sound resonates on its top side, so that the strings are struck from underneath and resonate from above, but the cithara has its wooden sound-box on the bottom. The Hebrews used the ten-string psaltery on account of the number of laws of the Decalogue.
8. The lyre (lyra) is so called from the word 2?p?±v (i.e. "speak frivolously"), that is, from 'variety of voices,' because it renders diverse sounds. They say that the lyre was first invented by Mercury in the following way. When the Nile was receding into its channels, it left behind various animals on the plains, and a tortoise was one that was stranded. When it decomposed, and its ten-
dons remained stretched out in the shell, it made a sound when Mercury plucked it. Mercury made a lyre of this shape and handed it over to Orpheus, who was by far its most zealous student. 9. Whence it is thought that by his art he controlled not only wild beasts but also the rocks and the woods by the modulation of his song. On account of his love of musical pursuits and praise of song, musicians have imagined, in the fic- tions of their tales, his lyre as being located among the stars.
The tympanum is a skin or hide stretched over one end of a wooden frame. It is half of a symphonia (i.e. another type of drum - see section 14 below and cf. xxi.7 above), and looks like a sieve. 10. The tympanum is so named because it is a half, whence the half-pearl is also called a tympanum. Like the symphonia, it is struck with a drumstick. 11. Cymbals (cymbalum) are certain vessels that make a sound when they are struck by touching one another. Cymbals are so called because they are struck simultaneously when there is dancing (ballematia), for the Greeks say oáv for "with" and ßa2? for "dancing."
12. Sistrums (sistrum, i.e. a kind of metallic rattle) are named after their inventor, for Isis, an Egyptian queen, is thought to have invented this type of instrument. Juvenal says (Satires 13.93):
May Isis strike my eyes with her angry sistrum.
Whence women play these instruments, because the inventor of this type of instrument was a woman. Whence also it is said that among the Amazons, the army of women was summoned to battle by sistrums.
13. The tintinabulum takes its name from the sound of its voice, just like the 'clapping' (plaudere) of hands, and the 'creaking' (stridor) of hinges. 14. The sympho- nia in common usage is the name for a hollow wood instrument with hide stretched over both ends. Musi- cians strike them on both sides with drumsticks, and make a very melodious sound from the consonance of the high and low pitches.
xxii. Musical numbers (De numeris musicis) 1. You find numbers with respect to music in this way (see viii.3 above). When the high and low numbers have been set, as, for example, 6 and 12, you see by how many units 6 is exceeded by 12, and that is by 6 units.
You make this number into a square, and 6 six times makes 36. You add together the low and high numbers that you first took, 6 and 12, and together they make
18. You divide 36 by 18, and it makes 2. You add this to the low number, that is, 6, and it comes to 8. 8 is the mean between 6 and 12. Wherefore 8 exceeds 6 by two units, that is, a third of 6, and 8 is exceeded by 12 by four units, a third of 12. Thus, the high number exceeds
the mean by the same proportion as the low number is exceeded by the mean. 2. But just as this proportion in the universe derives from the revolution of the spheres, so even in the microcosm it has such power beyond mere voice that no-one exists without its perfection and lacking harmony. Indeed, by the perfection of this same art of Music, meters are composed of arsis and thesis, that is, by rising up and setting down.
Astronomy (De astronomia)
xxiv. The name of astronomy (De astronomiae nomine) Astronomy (astronomia) is the law (cf. vóµoç, "law") of the stars (aster), which, by investigative reason- ing, touches on the courses of the constellations, and the figures and positions of the stars relative to each other and to the earth.
xxv. The inventors of astronomy (De inventoribus eius) 1. The Egyptians were the first to discover astronomy. However, the Chaldeans were the first to teach astrology (astrologia) and observations concerning nativities. But the author Josephus asserts that Abraham instructed the Egyptians in astrology. The Greeks say that this art was earlier conceived by Atlas, and that is why he was said to have held up the sky. 2. Yet whoever the inventor was, he was stirred by the movement of the heavens and prompted by the reasoning of his mind, and through the changing of the seasons, through the fixed and defined courses of the stars, through the measured expanses of their distances apart, he made observations of certain dimensions and numbers. By defining and dis- cerning these things, and weaving them into a system, he invented astrology.
xxvi. Those who established astronomy (De institu- toribus eius) In both languages, there are indeed vol- umes that have been written by diverse writers about astronomy. Among these writers, Ptolemy, the king of Alexandria, is thought to excel among the Greeks, for he established the canons whereby the courses of the stars are discovered.
xxvii. 
The difference between astronomy and astrol- ogy (De differentia astronomiae et astrologiae) 1. There is some difference between astronomy and astrol- ogy. Astronomy concerns itself with the turning of the heavens, the rising, setting, and motion of the stars, and where the constellations get their names. But astrology is partly natural, and partly superstitious. 2. It is natu- ral as long as it investigates the courses of the sun and the moon, or the specific positions of the stars accord- ing to the seasons; but it is a superstitious belief that the astrologers (mathematicus) follow when they prac- tice augury by the stars, or when they associate the twelve signs of the zodiac with specific parts of the soul or body, or when they attempt to predict the nativities and char- acters of people by the motion of the stars.
xxviii. Astronomical reckoning (De astronomiae ratione) There are several kinds of astronomical reck- oning. Indeed, it defineswhattheworldis; whattheheav- ens are; what is the position and course of the sphere; what is the axis of the heavens and the pole; what are the zones of the heavens; what are the courses of the sun and the moon and the stars, and so on.
xxix. The world and its name (De mundo et eius nomine) The world (mundus) is that which consists of the heavens, the earth, the seas, and all of the stars. The world is so named, because is it always in motion (motus), for no rest is granted to its elements.
xxx. The shape of the world (De forma mundi) The shape of the worldis showninthis way. Just as the world is raised up toward the northern region, so it declines toward the south. Its head and its face, as it were, is
the eastern region, and its furthest part is the northern region.
xxxi. The sky and its name (De caelo et eius nomine)
1. The philosophers have said that the sky (caelum, "sky, heaven, the heavens") is rounded, spinning, and burning; and the sky is called by its name because it has the figures of the constellations impressed into it, just like an engraved (caelare) vessel. 2. God distinguished the sky with bright lights, and he filled it with the sun and the gleaming orb of the moon, and he adorned it with brilliant constellations composed of glittering stars. In Greek the sky is called oùpavóç from óp?o9at, that is, from "seeing," from the fact that the air is clear and very pure for seeing through.
xxxii. The position of the celestial sphere (De sphaerae caelestis situ) 1. The sphere of the sky is a certain shape that is round in form, and its center is the earth, which is equally enclosed on all sides. They say that this sphere has neither a beginning nor an end, and this is so because it is round, just like a circle, and it may not easily be compre- hended at what point it begins, or where it ends. 2. The philosophers have proposed seven heavens belonging to the universe, that is, seven planets, from the coordinated motion of their spheres. They hold that everything is connected to the orbital paths of these planets, and they think that the planets are interconnected and in a way inserted within one another, and that they turn back- wards and are carried by a motion that is opposite to the other heavenly bodies.
xxxiii. The movement of this same sphere (De eius- dem sphaerae motu) 1. The movement of the sphere is caused by its turning on two axes, one of which is the northern, which never sets, and is called Boreus; and the other is the southern axis, which is never seen, and is called Austronotius. 2. They say that the sphere of heaven moves on these two poles, and with its movement, the stars, whichare fixed in it, make their circuit fromthe east to the west, with the northern stars completing shorter circular courses next to the turning point.
xxxiv. The course of the same sphere (De eiusdem sphaerae cursu) The sphere of heaven turns from east to west once in the span of a day and night, consisting of twenty-four hours, during which the sun, in its own
revolution, finishes its own course over the earth and under it.
xxxv. The speed of the sky (De celeritate caeli) The sphere of heaven is said to run with a swiftness so great that if the stars did not run against its headlong course to delay it, it would make a ruin of the universe.
xxxvi. The axis of heaven (De axe caeli) The northern axis is a straight line that stretches through the center of the ball of the sphere. It is called 'axis' (axis, i.e. "axle") because the sphere turns on it, as though it were a wheel; or because the Wain (i.e. Ursa Major) is there.
xxxvii. The celestial polar regions (De caelestibus polis) The polar regions are circles that run around the axis. One of them is the northern, which never sets, and is named Boreus. The other is the southern, which is never visible, and is called Austronotius. They are called 'polar regions' (polus) because they are circles around the axis, after the usage of a wagon, named specifically from 'polishing' (polire)- but the polar region Boreus is always visible and Austronotius never, because the right side of the heavens is higher, and the southern side is pressed down.
xxxviii. The poles of the heavens (De cardinibus caeli) The poles of the heavens are the extreme parts of the axis. They are called 'poles' (cardo, lit. "pivot") because the heavens are turned on them, or because these poles are turned as if they were the heart (cor).
xxxix. The vaults of heaven (De convexis caeli) The vaults (convexum) of the heavens are its edges, so called from their 'curvature' (curvitas), as in this line (source unidentified):
As often as the humid night enclosed the curved (convexus) heavens.
For a vault is 'curved' (curvus), as if the word were con- versus (i.e. "upside down"), and sloping downward, and bent in the manner of a circle.
xl. The doorways of heaven (De ianuis caeli) Heaven has two doorways, the eastern and the western. The sun proceeds from one portal, and another portal receives it.
xli. The twin faces of the sky (De gemina facie caeli) The face of the sky, or its head, is the eastern region, and the furthest part is the northern region. Lucan says this about it (Civil War 4.106):
Thus lies the deepest part of the world, which the snowy Zone and perpetual winters oppress.
xlii. The four parts of heaven (De quattor partibus caeli) 1. The regions (clima) of heaven, that is, the expanses or parts of it, are four in number, the first of which is the eastern, the region from where some stars rise. The second is the western, where, from our per- spective, some stars set. The third is the northern region, where the sun goes when the days are longer. The fourth is the southern, where the sun goes when the nights are longer. 2. The east (oriens) is the named for the rising (exortus) of the sun. The west (occidens) is so named because it makes the day perish (occidere, also meaning "set") and come to an end, for it takes the light from the world and brings on shadows. The north (septentrio) axis is so called from the seven (septem) stars, which, revolving about it, wheel around. This properly is also called the 'vertex' (vertex), because it turns (vertere). 3. The southern (meridies) zone is so called, either because the sun spends the middle of the day (medius dies) there, as though the word were medi-dies, or because the upper air is more pure there, for merus is the word for 'pure.'
4. There are seven other regions in heaven, as if seven lines come from the east and end in the west. Under them, the disparate characters of humans and animals of diverse species are produced. They are named after certain famous places; the first is Merois; the second Syene; the third Catachoras, that is Africa; the fourth is Rhodes; the fifth, Hellespont; the sixth, Mesopontum; and the seventh, Borysthenes.
xliii. The hemispheres (De hemisphaeriis) A hemi- sphere (hemisphaerion) is a half part of a sphere. The
hemisphere that is above the earth is all that part of the sky that is seen by us; the hemisphere under the earth is the part that cannot be seen as long as it is under the earth.
xliv. The five circles of heaven (De quinque circulis caeli) 1. There are five zones (zona) in the heavens, and based on their differences, certain regions are inhabited due to their temperate climate, and certain regions are uninhabitable from the brutality of the cold or heat. They are called zones or 'circles' (circulus) because they consist of a circular band (circumductio) of the sphere. 
2. The first of these circles is called ?pmttmóç (i.e. "arctic"), because the conspicuous constellations called Arctos (i.e. the Bears) are enclosed within it. The second circle is called 9?ptvòç tpoptmóç (i.e. "summer tropic") because in this circle the sun makes it summer when it is at its northern limit, and it does not travel beyond this circle, but rather turns back at once. Whence it is called tpoptmóç (cf. tpop?, "turning"). 3. The third circle is called ¡µ?ptvóç, and is called 'equinoctial' (aequinoctialis) by Latin speakers, because the sun, when it goes across to this zone, makes the day and night equal length (aequinoctium) - for the term ¡µ?ptvóç means 'day and night' in Latin. The central part of the sphere is seen to be made up of this band. The fourth circle is called ?vtapmttmóç (i.e. "antarctic") because it is opposite to the circle that we call ?pmttmóç. 4. The fifth circle is called y?tµ?ptvòç tpoptmóç (i.e. "winter tropic"). It is called 'winter' (hiemalis) or brumalis (i.e. another word for "winter") by Latin speakers, because when the sun travels to this circle, it makes winter for those who are in the north, and summer for those who live in the southern regions.
xlv. The circle of the zodiac (De zodiaco circulo) The circle of the zodiac (zodiacus circulus) consists of five angles made from lines, and one line. 
xlvi. The bright circle (De candido circulo) The Milky Circle (lacteus circulus, i.e. the Milky Way) is the road seen in the sphere of the sky, named for its brightness (candor), because it is white. Some people say that this road is where the sun makes its circuit, and that it shines from the splendor of the sun's transit.
xlvii. The size of the sun (De magnitudine solis) The size of the sun is greater than that of the earth, whence
at that very moment when it rises, it appears equally at the same moment to a person in the east and to a person in the west. However, because it seems one cubit long to us, we need to consider how far the sun is from the earth, the distance that makes the sun seem small to us.
xlviii. The size of the moon (De magnitudine lunae) The size of the moon is said to be less than that of the sun. Since the sun is higher than the moon, and yet it still seems larger than the moon from our perspective, if the sun were to come close to us, it would be obvious how much larger the sun is than the moon. Indeed, just as the sun is larger than the earth, so the earth is greater than the moon by a certain quantity.
xlix. The nature of the sun (De natura solis) Since the sun is fiery, it grows hotter due to the excessive movement of its revolution. The philosophers say that its fire is nourished by water, and it receives the power of its light and heat from that opposing element. Whence we often see the sun moist and dewy.
l. The course of the sun (De cursu solis) 1. The sun moves under its own power, and does not turn with the universe. If it were to remain fixed in the heavens, every day and night would be of equal length; but since we see that it will set in a different place tomorrow, and that it had in a different place yesterday, it appears that it moves through its own power, and does not turn along with the universe. Furthermore, the sun makes its annual orbits with unequal intervals, on account of the changing of the seasons. When the sun rises, it makes the day; when it sets, it brings on the night. 2. Wandering farther to the south it makes winter, so that the earth grows fertile with wintry moisture and frost. When it approaches closer to the north, it brings summer back, so that crops grow firm in ripeness, and what was unripened in damp weather mellows in its warmth.
li. The effect of the sun (De effectu solis) 1. When the sun rises, it creates the day, and when it sets it brings on the night, for day is the sun over the earth, and night is the sun under the earth. The hours come from it: the day comes from the sun when it ascends: the night comes from it when it sets. The months and the years are numbered by it, and the changing of the seasons is caused by it. 2. When the sun runs across the south, it is
the closer to the earth; but when it is near the north, it is raised higher in the sky.
[Thus God made diverse locations and seasons for the sun's course, so that it does not consume everything with its daily heat by always tarrying in the same place. But, as Clement said, "The sun takes diverse paths, by means of which the temperature of the air is meted out according to the pattern of the seasons, and the order of its changes and permutations is preserved. Thus when the sun ascends to the higher reaches, it tempers the spring air; when it reaches its zenith, it kindles the sum- mer heat; dropping again it brings back the temperance of autumn. But when it goes back to the lowest orbit, it bequeaths to us from the icy framework of the sky the rigor of winter cold."] 
lii. The path of the sun (De itinere solis) The sun, when it rises, holds a path through the south. Afterward, it goes to the west and plunges itself into the Ocean, and it travels unknown paths under the earth, and once again runs back to the east.
liii. The light of the moon (De lumine lunae) 1. Some philosophers say that the moon has its own light; that one part of its orb emits light and the other is dark [thus: (a figure follows)] and that by gradually turning itself it makes different shapes. 2. Others maintain on the contrary that the moon does not have its own light, but is illuminated by the rays of the sun, and for this reason undergoes an eclipse when the earth's shadow comes between it and the sun. [For the sun is located higher than the moon. Hence it happens that when the moon is beneath the sun, the upper part of the moon is lighted, but the lower part, which is facing the earth, is dark.]
liv. The shapes of the moon (De formas lunae) 1. The first shape of the moon has two horns, thus: (a figure follows). The second [has] a section, [thus:] (fig.). The
The Etymologies	III.liv.2-lxv  103
third has a half, thus: (fig.). The fourth is full, thus: (fig.). The fifth is half again, [from the full side], thus: (fig.). The sixth is a section again, thus (fig.). The seventh is two-horned, thus: (fig.). 2. The seventh lunar day, when the moon is a half, and the twenty-second, when it is a half, are the midpoints of its orbit (fig.), and the other days are proportional.
lv. Interlunar intervals (De interluniis) The interlu- nar interval of the moon is the time between the waning and the waxing moon. This is the thirtieth day, when the moon does not shine. At that time the moon cannot be seen, because it is in conjunction with the sun and dark- ened. But it is seen the moment it is reborn by moving gradually away from the sun.
lvi. The path of the moon (De cursu lunae) 1. The moon measures out the span of a month in its alter- nations of losing and receiving light. Therefore, it pro- ceeds on an oblique path, not a straight one like the sun, indeed, lest it fall into the central plane of the earth and frequently undergo eclipse. 2. For its circular path is close to the earth. When it is waxing, its horns look to the east, and when it is waning they look to the west, and justly so, since it is about to set and lose its light.
lvii. Theproximityofthemoontotheearth(Devicini- tate lunae ad terras) The moon is nearer to the earth than the sun is. Whence, due to its shorter orbit, it com- pletes its course more quickly, for the journey that the sun completes in 365 days the moon runs through in thirty days. Whence the ancients established months based on the moon, and years based on the course of the sun.
lviii. Eclipse of the sun (De eclipsi solis) An eclipse of the sun occurs whenever the moon, on the thirtieth lunar day, comes to that line where the sun travels, and by interposing itself before the sun, conceals it. Thus to us the sun appears to vanish when the orb of the moon is set before it.
lix. Eclipse of the moon (De eclipsi lunae) 1. An eclipse of the moon occurs whenever the moon runs into the
shadow of the earth. The moon is thought not to have its own light, but to be illuminated by the sun; hence it disappears if the earth's shadow comes between it and the sun. 2. This happens to the moon on the fifteenth lunar day, until it leaves the central part and the shadow of the intervening earth and sees the sun, or is seen by the sun.
lx. The differences between stars, star clusters, and constellations (De differentia stellarum, siderum, et astrorum) 1. Stars (stella), star clusters (sidus), and con- stellations (astrum) are different from each other. Thusa star is any individual body, but star clusters are made up of several stars, such as the Hyades and the Pleiades. 2. Constellations are large patterns of stars, such as Orion and Bootes. But writers confuse these terms, and use astrum instead of stella, and stella instead of sidus. 
lxi. The light of stars (De lumine stellarum) Stars are said not to possess their own light, but to be illuminated by the sun, as the moon is.
lxii. The location of the stars (De stellarum situ) Stars are unmoving and, being fixed, are carried with the heav- ens in perpetual motion. They do not set during the day, but they are obscured by the brightness of the sun.
lxiii. Thecourseofthestars(Destellarumcursu) Stars are either carried or move. The ones that are fixed in the sky and turn with the sky are carried. But some [like] planets, that is, 'wanderers,' move. However, they carry out their roaming courses within a defined boundary.
lxiv. The changing course of the stars (De vario cursu stellarum) Because they are carried across the various orbits of the heavenly planets, some stars rise earlier and set later, while others rise later and reach the point of setting sooner. Some rise together but do not set at the same time. But all return to their proper course in their own time.
lxv. The distances between the stars (De stellarum intervallis) The stars differ from each other in their dis- tance from the earth, and for this reason they appear unequal to our eyes, being either brighter or less bright. Thus many stars are larger than the ones that we see as
prominent, but since they are set further away, they seem small to us.
lxvi. The orbital number of the stars (De circulari numero stellarum) 1. The orbital number of stars is that number by which it is said that one may know how long a given star takes to complete its orbit, going either by longitude or by latitude. 2. For the moon is said to complete its orbit each year, Mercury every twenty years, Lucifer every nine years, the sun every nineteen years, Vesper every fifteen years, Phaethon every twelve years, and Saturn every thirty years. When these periods of time have passed, they return to repeat their orbit across the same signs and regions. 3. Some stars become irreg- ular when they are hindered by the sun's rays, becom- ing retrograde or stationary, according to what the poet recalls when he says (cf. Lucan, Civil War 10.201):
The sun divides the seasons of time: it changes the day to night, and by its powerful rays prevents the stars from proceeding, and delays their roaming courses by its ordering.
lxvii. Planets (De stellis planetis) Certain stars are called planets (planeta), that is, 'wandering ones,' because they range through the entire cosmos with a varying motion. It is because of their wandering that they are called retrograde, or are rendered irregular when they add or subtract orbital degrees. When they pull back only they are called retrograde, and they make a 'station' (statio) when they stand still.
lxviii. Precession and antegrade motion of stars (De praecedentia et antegradatione stellarum) Precession (praecedentia), or antegrade motion, of stars occurs when the star seems to drive its own motion, and pre- cedes (praecedere) something beyond what is usual.
lxix. Recession or retrograde motion of stars (De remotione vel retrogradatione stellarum) Recession (remotio), or retrograde motion, of stars occurs when a star, although driving its own motion, at the same time seems to move backward.
lxx. The standing of stars (De statu stellarum) A standing (status) of stars occurs when, although a star always moves, it nevertheless seems to stand still in some places.
lxxi. The names of the stars and the reasons for these names (De nominibus stellarum, quibus ex cau- sis nomina acceperunt) 1. The sun (sol) is so named because it appears alone (solus), with all the constella- tions obscured by its brilliance. The moon (luna) is so named as if the word were Lucina, but with the middle syllable removed. Concerning this, Vergil says (Ecl. 4.10):
Chaste Lucina, show favor . . . 
2. It has taken this name by derivation from the light (lux, gen. lucis) of the sun, because it receives light from the sun, and gives off what it has received. 3. Stars (stella) are named from 'standing' (stare), because they always stand fixed in the sky and do not fall. Indeed, when we see what looks like stars falling from the sky, these are not stars, but little pieces of fire fallen from the aether. They are produced when the wind, seeking higher altitudes, drags the aetherial fire with it, and with this dragging the fire mimics falling stars. Stars are not able to fall, since they are immobile, as has been said earlier, and are carried with the sky since they are fixed in it.
4. Constellations (sidus) are so named because sailors 'take bearings on' (considerare) them when they set their course, lest they be led elsewhere by deceptive waves and winds. And for that reason some stars are called signs (signum), because sailors observe them in steering their rowing, taking note of their keenness and brightness, qualities by which the future state of the sky is shown. 5. But everyone pays attention to them for predicting the qualities of the air in the summer, winter, and spring seasons, for by their rising or setting in specific places they indicate the condition of the weather.
6. The first of the signs is Arctos, which, fixed on the pole, rotates with its seven stars revolving around it. Its name is Greek (i.e. ?pmtoç, "bear"), and in Latin it is called the Bear (Ursa). Because it turns like a wagon, we call it the Septentriones (i.e. septem, "seven" + triones). 7. For triones, strictly speaking, are plowing oxen, so called because they tread (terere) the soil, as if the word were teriones. Their proximity to the pole causes them not to set, because they are on the pole.
8. Arctophylax (i.e. the "bear-keeper") is so named because it follows Arctos, that is, the Great Bear. People have also called this constellation Bootes, because it is attached to the Wain (cf. bos, "ox," which draws a wagon; ßoÛt?ç, "plowman"). It is a very noticeable sign with its many stars, one of which is Arcturus. 9. Arcturus is a star located in the sign of Bootes beyond the tail of the Great Bear. For this reason it is called 'Arcturus,' as if it were the Greek ?pmtoU oùp? (i.e. "tail of the bear"), because it is located next to the heart of Bootes. It rises in the season of autumn. 10. Orion shines in the south, in front of the tracks of Taurus. It is named 'Orion' from urine (urina), that is, from a flood of waters, for it rises in the winter season, and troubles the sea and the land with waters and storms. 11. Latin speakers call this constellation the Jugula (cf. iugulum, "throat," with a figurative sense "slaughter") because it is armed, as if it has a sword, and is terrible and very brilliant in the light of its stars. If all of its stars are shining, then calm weather is forecast, but if their sharpness is blunted, then a storm is understood to loom.
12. The Hyades are named from the Greek u?tv (i.e. the verb "rain"), that is, from moisture (sucus) and rains, for 'rain' in Greek is ú?tóç, and the Hyades make rain when they rise. Whence also Latin speakers have named them Suculae, because when they arise, signs of rain are evident. Concerning them Vergil says (Aen. 1.744):
Arcturus and the rainy Hyades.
They are seven stars, in the forehead of Taurus, and they rise in the spring season. 13. The Pleiades (Pliades) are named from their plural number (pluralitas), because the Greeks name plural number from p2?±otoç (i.e. "most"). They are seven stars, in front of the knees of Taurus; six of them are visible and the seventh is hid- den. Latin speakers call them Vergiliae, as an indication of the season when they arise, which is spring (ver). By their setting they show the winter, by their rising the summer, and they are the first to show the season for sailing.
14. The Dog Star (canicula stella), which is also called Sirius, is in the center of the sky during the summer months. When the sun ascends to it, and it is in con- junction with the sun, the sun's heat is doubled, and bodies are affected by the heat and weakened. Hence also the 'dog days' are named from this star, when purg- ings are harmful. 15. It is called the 'Dog' (canis) Star
because it afflicts the body with illness, or because of the brightness (candor) of its flame, because it is of a kind that seems to shine more brightly than the others. It is said they named Sirius so that people might recognize the constellaion better.
16. A comet (cometa) is a star, so named because it spreads out the 'hair' (coma) of its light. When this type of star appears it signifies plague, famine, or war. 17. Comets are called crinitae in Latin, because they spread their flames like hair (crines). The Stoics say that there are more than thirty comets whose names and effects certain astrologers have written about. 18. Lucifer (i.e. Venus as morning star) is so named because it carries light (lucem ferre) more than the other stars. It is one of the planets. It is appropriately called Iubar (lit. "radiance") because it emits a mane (iuba) of light, but the 'splendor' of the sun and moon and stars is also called iubar, because their rays extend like a mane.
19. Vesperus (i.e. Venus as evening star) is a western star. People maintain that its name is taken from Hespe- rus, a king of Spain. It brings in the night and follows the sun, and is itself one of the five planets. It is said that this star turns into the morning star when it rises and the evening star when it sets. Concerning this Statius says (Thebaid 6.241):
And the one is derived from the other's rising.
20. Planets are stars that are not fixed in the sky as the rest are, but are carried through the air. They are called 'plan- ets' (planeta) from the word p2?v?, that is, 'wandering,' for sometimes they are carried to the south and some- times to the north, and they are often carried against the cosmos, and sometimes with it. Their Greek names are Phaethon, Phaenon, Pyrion, Hesperus, and Stilbon.
21. The Romans have consecrated them with the names of their gods, that is, Jupiter, Saturn, Mars, Venus, and Mercury. Themselves deceived, and wishing to deceive others into the worship of those who had granted them something in accordance with their desires, they would point out the stars in the sky, and say that this one was Jupiter's and that one was Mercury's, and this vain belief was born. The devil strengthened this erroneous belief, and Christ overturned it.
22. Next, those constellations that are called signs (signum) by the pagans, in which the image of living beings is formed from stars, such as Arctos, Aries, Tau- rus, Libra and others of this type. In their study of the
constellations these people, prompted by superstitious folly, imposed the shape of a body on the configuration of stars, making their appearance and names conform, through certain characteristics, to those of their gods.
23. Hence the first sign - through which, as also through Libra, people draw the middle line of the cosmos - they have named Aries (i.e. the Ram) on account of Ammon Jupiter, because those who made the idols fashioned the horns of a ram on his head. 24. The pagans placed this sign first among their signs because they say that the sun travels in this sign in the month of March, which is the beginning of the year. But they likewise place Taurus among the constellations, and this one also is in honor of Jupiter, because according to myth he was changed into a bull when he carried off Europa.
25. They also set Castor and Pollux after their death among the most noteworthy constellations; they call this sign 'Gemini.' 26. They named Cancer likewise, because when the sun reaches this sign in the month of June, it moves backward in the manner of a crab (cancer) and makes the days shorter. This animal has no defi- nite forepart, but heads to either side, so that the front part becomes the back and the back becomes the front.
27. Hercules killed an enormous lion in Greece and set it among the twelve signs as a mark of his own valor. When the sun reaches this sign, it gives excessive heat to the world, and causes the annual Etesian winds. 28. They located the sign Virgo among the constellations because on the days when the sun runs through it the earth is parched by the heat of the sun and bears nothing, for this is the season of the dog days.
29. They named Libra from the equal balance of this month because on September 24 the sun makes the equinox while running through this sign. Whence Lucan also says (Civil War 4.58):
To the scales of just Libra.
30. They named Scorpio likewise, and Sagittarius, because of the lightning bolts that fall in this month. Sagittarius is a man misshapen by having the legs of a horse, and they added a bow and arrow (sagitta) to him to indicate the lightning of his month; hence the sign is called Sagittarius. 31. They imagined the figure of Capricorn (i.e. "goat-horn") among the constellations because of the goat that was Jupiter's nurse. They made the rear part of its body in the image of a fish to indi- cate the rains of this season, which usually occur plen-
tifully towards the end of this month. 32. Furthermore, they named Aquarius and Pisces from the rainstorms of that season, because in the winter, when the sun travels through these signs, more rain falls. And the mindless- ness of the pagans is to be marveled at; they set not only fish, but even rams and goats and bulls, bears and dogs and crabs and scorpions into the sky. Further, because of the stories about Jupiter, they also located an eagle and a swan among the constellations of the sky, for the sake of his memory.
33. The pagans also believed that Perseus and his wife Andromeda had been received into the heavens after they died, and so they traced out their images in stars and did not blush to name these constellations after them.
34. They even set the charioteer Ericthonius among the stars of the sky, because they recognized him as the first to yoke a four-horse chariot. They marveled that his genius extended to an imitation of the sun (i.e. as char- ioteer), and on this account placed his name, after he died, among the constellations. 35. So it was with Cal- listo, daughter of King Lycaon, since according to legend she had been ravished by Jupiter and changed by Juno into a bear, which is ?pmtoç in Greek; after her death Jupiter transferred her name, along with that of his son by her, into the Septentriones, and called her Arctus and her son Arctophylax (see sections 6-9 above). 36. Thus Lyra was placed in the sky on Mercury's account, and thus the centaur Chiron, because he reared Aesculapius and Achilles, was counted among the stars.
37. But whatever the type of superstition with which they have been named by men, the stars are nevertheless things that God created at the beginning of the world, and he set them in order that they might define the sea- sons by their particular motions. 38. Therefore, observa- tions of the stars, or horoscopes, or other superstitions that attach themselves to the study of the stars, that is, for the sake of knowing the fates - these are undoubtedly contrary to our faith, and ought to be so completely ignored by Christians that it seems that they have not been written about. 39. But some people, enticed by the beauty and clarity of the constellations, have rushed headlong into error with respect to the stars, their minds blinded, so that they attempt to be able to foretell the results of things by means of harmful computations, which is called 'astrology' (mathesis).
Not only those learned in the Christian religion, but also Plato, Aristotle, and others among the pagans, were moved by the truth of things to agree in condemning this in their judgment, saying that a confusion of mat- ters was generated by such a belief. 40. For if humans are forced towards various acts by the compulsion of their nativity, then why should the good deserve praise, and why should the wicked reap the punishment of law?
And although these pagan sages were not devoted to heavenly wisdom, nevertheless they rightly struck down these errors by their witness to the truth. 41. But clearly that order of the seven secular disciplines was taken by the philosophers as far as the stars, so that they might draw minds tangled in secular wisdom away from earthly matters and set them in contemplation of what is above.
