i. War (De bellis) 1. Ninus, king of the Assyrians, was the first to wage war. Not at all content with his own boundaries, this Ninus, breaking the compact of human society, began to lead armies, to destroy other lands, and to massacre or subject free peoples. He completely sub- jugated the whole of Asia up to the borders of Libya in an unprecedented slavery. From this point on the world strove to grow fat in reciprocal bloodshed with one slaughter after another.
2. Now there are four kinds of war: just, unjust, civil, and more than civil. A just war is that which is waged in accordance with a formal declaration and is waged for the sake of recovering property seized or of driving off the enemy. An unjust war is one that is begun out of rage, and not for a lawful reason. Cicero speaks of this in the Republic (3.35): "Those wars are unjust that are taken up without due cause, for except for the cause of avenging or of driving off the enemy no just war can be waged."
3. And he adds this a little further on: "No war is con- sidered just unless it is officially announced or declared, and unless it is fought to recover property seized." Civil (civilis) war occurs when factions arise among fellow- citizens (civis) and hostilities are stirred up, as between Sulla and Marius, who waged civil war against each other within one nation. 4. A 'more than civil' war is where not only fellow-citizens, but also kinfolk fight - this was done by Caesar and Pompey, when father-in-law and son-and-law fought each other. Indeed, in that battle brother struggled against brother, and father bore arms against son. Lucan (Civil War 2.151):
Brothers fell as the battle-prize of their brothers.
Again (2.150):
To whom the slashed neck of a parent would yield.
5. Wars are also defined as internal, external, of slaves, of allies, and of pirates. Pirate (piraticus) wars are spo- radic wars on the sea against brigands, when light, swift
pirate ships plunder not only shipping routes but also islands and provinces. With wonderful speed Gnaeus Pompey first checked and then defeated such pirates after they had wrought great destruction for a long time on land and sea. 6. As what is waged against external enemies is called 'war,' so 'insurrection' (tumultus) is what is stirred up by civil sedition. Sedition (seditio) is a dissension (dissensio) of citizens, so called because they separate (seorsum ire) into different factions. Oth- ers think sedition is named from 'dissension of minds,' which the Greeks call 6t?otaotç. 7. Cicero explains how the two differ (Philippics 8.3): "There can be," he says, "a war such that an insurrection will not happen, but there cannot be an insurrection without war. Indeed, what other is an insurrection than a disturbance so great that a greater fear (timor) arises?" Whence an insurrection (tumultus) is so called as if it were 'great fear' (timor multus). "An insurrection is more severe than a war, for in a war exemptions from service can take place, in an insurrection they cannot."
8. Moreover war, battles, and skirmishes (bellum, pugna, proelium) differ from each other. Thus, the whole affair is called a war, as 'the Punic war.' Its segments are battles, as the battle of Cannae, or of Thermae. Again, in one battle there are many skirmishes - for different skirmishes take place in the wings, in the middle, and at the ends of the battle line. A war is the whole conflict, a battle is of one day, and a skirmish is part of a battle.
9. Formerly a war was called a duel (duellum), because there are two (duo) factions in combat, or because war makes one the victor, the other the defeated. Later, with one letter changed and another deleted, it becomes the word bellum. Others think it is so called by antiphrasis - because it is horrid, whence the verse (Vergil, Aen. 6.86):
Wars (bellum), horrid wars -
for "lovely" (bellum) is the contrary of a very bad thing. 
10. Skirmishes (proelium) are named from 'press- ing down' (imprimere), as an enemy presses down the enemy. From this also is the press-beam (prela
ligna) with which grapes are pressed. A battle (pugna) is so called because originally people used to fight wars with their fists (pugnus), or because a war would first begin with fistfights (pugna). Whence a pugna is sometimes between two people and without iron weapons.
11. Four activities occur in war: battle, flight, victory, and peace. The word 'peace' (pax, gen. pacis) seems to be drawn from 'pact' (pactum). A peace is agreed upon afterwards; first a treaty is initiated. A treaty (foedus) is a peace that is made between contenders, named either from 'trust' (fides) or from fetiales (i.e. the Roman priests charged with confirming peace or war), that is, priests. Through the fetiales treaties were made, just as wars were made by lay people. Others think that treaties are so called from a sow foully (foede) and cruelly slaughtered, the kind of death desired for anyone who may withdraw from a peace treaty. Vergil (Aen. 8.641):
And they would join in treaties with the slaughter of a sow.
The parts of a treaty are truces (indutiae), and they are called indutiae as if they were 'breaks in the fighting for a day' (in dies otia).
ii. Triumphs (De triumphis) 1. Every realm in this world is procured in wars and extended by victories. A victory (victoria) is so called because it is attained by 'force' (vis), that is, 'strength' (virtus). This is the law of nations, to expel 'force by force' (vim vi), for a victory acquired by guile is wicked. A sure victory is either the killing or the complete despoiling of the enemy, or both. But the victory attained at huge cost is not happy, and this is why Sallust (Histories 3.29) praises generals who win victory with an unbloodied army. 2.A 'solemn pro- cession' (pompa) is a term that takes its meaning from the Greek word poµp?á?tv ("lead in a procession"), that is, to be publicly displayed. But a victory precedes a proces- sion, because the first thing for those going into combat is a votive offering for victory.
3.A 'victory trophy' (tropeum) takes its name from the term tpop? ("turning"), that is, from the turning and rout of the enemy. This is because anyone who routed the enemy would merit a trophy, and any who killed him, a 'triumphal procession' (triumphus), so called from the word 9pt?µß? (i.e. 9p(c)aµßoç, "triumphal hymn"),
that is, from exultation. A triumph is due to someone who attains a complete victory, and a trophy for a half-complete one, because he has not yet attained a complete victory, for he has not captured, but routed the enemy. But writers confuse these terms. Tranquillus (i.e. Suetonius, Prata 109), however, says that triumphus is the preferred term in Latin, because he who entered the city in a triumph would be honored by a threefold judgment: in granting a triumph for a general it was cus- tomary for the army to judge first, the senate second, and the people third. 4. It was moreover the custom of the Romans that those making their triumph would ride in chariots, because the early generals would go into battle thus equipped.
Further, whoever conquered in combat would be crowned with a gilded palm-wreath, because the palm has thorns, but whoever laid the fleeing enemy low with- out combat would get a laurel wreath, because that tree is without thorns. 5. Moreover, those triumphing were clothed in the purple toga embroidered with palms, and would carry a staff (scipio) with a scepter in their hand in imitation of the victory of Scipio, although a scipio is a staff by which people support themselves. Whence that first Cornelius was called Scipio, because his blind father would walk in the forum leaning on a staff. On this scipio would sit an eagle, to signify that by victory the triumphant ones approached celestial greatness. 6. Hence the victors would be smeared all over with red pig- ment, as if in imitation of the appearance of divine fire. However, they would be accompanied by a hangman, to signify that, even though they were lifted up to such an exalted state, they might still be forcibly reminded of their human mediocrity.
7. An army may be wiped out intwo ways, by wholesale slaughter or by dispersal. Sallust (fr. 6): "The enemy," he says, "would be crushed, or dispersed." And Vergil speaks thus of both ways. By slaughter (Aen. 1.69):
And sink the swamped ships.
By dispersal (Aen. 1.70):
Or drive them apart and scatter their bodies in the sea.
8. Pillage from the enemy consists of booty, plunder, spoils, and booty-shares. Booty (praeda) is so called from plundering (praedari). Plunder (manubiae), because it is taken away by hand (manus). Also spoils (exuviae) are so
named from 'strip off' (exuere), because they are stripped from bodies. And booty-shares (pars) are so called from the equitable (par) division of spoils according to the rank of the person and a fair judgment of their efforts. The word 'spoils' (spolia) itself is from 'garments' (pal- lium), as if the word were expallia (i.e. "unclothings"), for they are stripped away from the vanquished.
iii. Militarystandards(Designis) 1. Military standards (signum) are so called because an army receives from them its signal for retreat both in the course of fighting and in the case of victory, for an army is ordered either by the sound of a trumpet or by a signal flag. The major standards of the legions are eagles, dragons, and orbs.
2. Eagles, because that bird was auspicious in Jupiter's combats, for when Jupiter set out against the Titans, people say an eagle appeared as a good omen for him. Fortunate in its protection, and taking it as a sign of victory, Jupiter made the eagle the emblem for a legion. Hence it came about that it was afterwards employed in military standards. Lucan recalls this, saying (Civil War 1.7):
Standards (against standards), eagles matching eagles, and javelins threatening javelins.
3. The standard of dragons originated in the killing of the serpent Python by Apollo. Hence they began to be carried in battle by Greeks and Romans. 4. Augustus is said to have established the orb (pila) as a standard - because the nations of the whole globe (orbis) were sub- jected to him - so that he might the more display the figure of the globe (orbis).
5. A banner (vexillum) is also a battle-sign, having its name drawn from the diminutive of 'sail' (velum), as if it were velxillum. Under Romulus, soldiers had small bundles of hay for their banners; hence their companies were called manipuli, for we give this name to bundles of hay that 'fill the hand' (manum implere). According to military custom there are other signs that display diverse images by which an army recognizes itself in the tumult of battle.
iv. War-trumpets (De bucinis) 1. A war-trumpet (bucina) is the means by which a signal is given to go against an enemy, so called from its 'sound' (vox, gen. vocis), as if it were vocina - for villagers and country
people on every occasion used to be called together to their meeting place by a war-trumpet; properly therefore this signal was for country people. About this, Propertius (cf. Elegies 4.1.13):
The war-trumpet (bucina) drove the ancient Quirites to arms.
Its clangor is called a 'blare' (bucinum). 2. The Tyrrhe- nians first invented the trumpet (tuba), whence [also] Vergil (Aen. 8.526):
The Tyrrhenian clangor of the trumpet (tuba) blasted through the air.
This trumpet was conceived of by Tyrrhenian pirates, when, scattered along the seashore, they were not easily called together by voice or bucina to each opportunity for booty, especially with the wind roaring. 3. Hence afterwards in battles it was used for announcing military signals so that, where a herald could not be heard amid the tumult, the sound of a blaring trumpet (tuba) would reach. It is called tuba as if it were tofa, that is, hollow. Again, tuba, as if it were tibia ("flute").
4. The ancients distinguished between trumpet (tuba) and war-trumpet (bucina), for a sounding war-trumpet would announce alarm about approaching war - Vergil (Aen. 7.519):
With which the dire war-trumpet gave its signal.
But they would signal a battle under way with the trum- pet, as (Vergil, Aen. 9.503):
But the trumpet (sounded) its terrible sound.
The sounding of the trumpet varies: sometimes it sounds for battle to be joined, sometimes to chase the flee- ing enemy, sometimes for retreat. A retreat (receptus) is the name of the maneuver by which an army regroups (recipere), whence the expression 'to sound the signal for retreat.' 5. Classica are horns made in order to call people together, and they were called classica from 'call together' (calare). About these, Vergil (Aen. 7.637):
And now the classica sound.
However, among the Amazons the army is not called by a trumpet, as armies that are called by kings, but their army of women is called together by the queen with a sistrum.
v. Arms (De armis) 1. Arms (arma) generally are instruments of all kinds; hence the places where they are stored are called storage-chests (armaria). Again, arms and weapons (telum) are of all kinds, but arms are instruments by which we are protected, and weapons are what we throw. Thus there are two kinds of arms, that is, either for striking or for shielding. 2. Arms prop- erly are so called because they cover the shoulders, for arms (arma) are named from 'shoulders' (armus), that is, from upper arms (umerus), as (Vergil, Aen. 11.644):
The spear driven through his broad shoulders (armus) quivers.
Or arma derives from the name *p?ç, that is, from 'Mars.'
vi. Swords (De gladiis) 1.A sword (gladius) is generally called a 'blade' (ensis) in military use, but the blade is the iron part only, whereas a sword is the whole thing. Properly it is called gladius because it 'divides the throat' (gulam dividere), that is, cuts the neck. It was made for this purpose first, for other limbs are more efficiently cut by battle-axes, but the neck only by the sword. 2. The edge (acies) of a sword is so called from its sharpness (acumen). The hilt (capulus) is so named either because it is the head (caput) of the sword, or because it is grasped (capere) there so that it may be held, for the edge does not allow the sword to be held in any other way. The term 'point' (mucro) pertains not only to a sword, but also to the cutting edge ofany kind of weapon. It is so called from its extended length, for the Greeks say µampóç for 'long' - and hence also another term for sword, machaera. A machaera is a long sword that is sharp on one side.
3.A framea is a sword sharpened on both edges, which is commonly called a spata (i.e. spatha). It is also called a rhomphaea. The framea is so called because it is of iron (ferreus)- for it is called framea as if the word were ferramentum (i.e. an iron implement), and thus every swordmaybecalleda framea. 4. Theword spatha ("broad sword") is from 'suffering,' from the Greek term, for the Greek pa9?±v means "to suffer," whence we say patior ("I suffer") and patitur ("he suffers"). Others assert that spatha was so named in Latin, because it is 'spacious' (spatiosus), that is, broad and large - whence also comes the term spatula (i.e. "broad piece (of meat)") with regard to livestock. 5. A semispathium is a sword named for its length of half a spatha and not, as the ignorant
masses say, from 'without a space of time' (sine spatio), seeing that it is swifter than an arrow.
6. The dagger (pugio) is so called from piercing (pun- gere) and transfixing. It is a small sword, double-edged, and worn at the side. It is also called a clunabulum, because it is girded at the hip (clunis). 7. The swallow- tailed (chelidoniacus) sword is a broad weapon with a double tip that is bifurcated like a swallow's tail, whence it is called swallow-tailed (cf. y?2t6Ûv, "swallow"). 8. A poniard (sica) is so called from 'cutting' (secare). It is a short sword mainly used among the Italians by those who engage in highway robbery, whence also highway robbers are called sicarii. Moreover, Tranquillus (i.e. Sue- tonius, History of Games 195) says: "When the sword of a certain gladiator who had been sent into the games was bent, losing its straight edge, someone ran up to fix it. Then the fighter responded, 'Thus, ha! (Sic ha), will I fight.' Thence it was given the name sica." 9. Axes (securis) are symbols that were carried in front of con- suls. The Spanish call them franciscae by derivation from their use by the Franks (Franci). They had those symbols thus carried so that they would not lose the habit of war, or forget the look of weapons during peacetime.
vii. Spears (De hastis) 1.A spear (hasta) is a shaft (con- tus) with an iron head; its diminutive is 'dart' (hastilia). The name hasta comes from 'craft' (astus), whence also is the term 'cunning' (astutia). 2. A pike (contum) has no iron, but only a sharpened tip. Vergil (Aen. 5.208):
The iron-pointed javelins and the pikes (contus) with their sharpened tip.
And contum is as if the word were conitum ("cone- shaped"), for a cone (conum) is a cylinder brought to a point. 3. Javelins (trudis) are poles with a crescent- shaped iron piece that the Greeks call aplustria. They are rightly called trudes because they shove (trudere) and thrust down (detrudere). Vergil (Aen. 5.208):
The iron-pointed javelins (trudis).
4. Hunting-spears (venabulum) are so called as if the term were venatui (h)abilis ("apt for hunting"), or because they 'intercept the oncomer' (venientem excipere), as iftheywere excipiabula. Indeed, "Theyinter- cept (excipere) boars, lie in wait for lions, and penetrate bears, if only one's hand is steady" (cf. Martial, Epigrams 14.50).
5. A lance (lancea) is a spear with a strap attached to the middle of its shaft; it is called lancea because it is thrown weighed equally in the 'scales' (lanx, ablative lance), that is, with the strap evenly balanced. 6.A strap (amentum) is the thong of throwing spears which is fitted to mid-shaft, and hence amentum because it is tied to the middle (medius) of the spear so that it can be thrown. 7. A club (clava) is of the kind that belonged to Hercules, so called because it is bound with rows of iron nails (clavus). It is made one and a half cubits long. There is a javelin called cateia, which Horace calls caia. It is a type of Gaulish projectile made of the toughest possible wood, which certainly does not fly far when thrown, because of its weight, but where it reaches it smashes with very great force. If it is thrown by a skillful man it comes back to the thrower. Vergil records it, saying (Aen. 7.741):
Used to hurling cateiae in the Teutonic (Teutonicus) manner.
Whence the Spanish and Gauls call them tautani.
8.A falarica is a huge missile made on a lathe, having an iron piece a cubit long and a ball of lead in the shape of a sphere. It is also said to have fire attached to its head. One fights with these missiles from towers, which makes clear why they are so called. Juvenal (cf. Satires 6.590):
You take counsel before the siege-towers (fala) and the columns supporting the dolphins.
Therefore falarica is named from fala, just as muralis ("mural") is from murus ("wall"). Lucan rightly says it is hurled with twisted thongs by a certain siege-engine (Civil War 6.198):
So that now the falarica hurled by twisted thongs.
But Vergil says that Turnus cast a falarica with his hand (Aen. 9.705). 9. Weapons that are spears and missiles employed by hurling or casting are called 'heavy javelins' (pila). Of these, Lucan (Civil War 1.7):
Standards (against standards), eagles matching eagles, and javelins (pila) threatening javelins.
The singular is pilum.
10.A missile (telum) is so called after a Greek etymol- ogy, from the word t?2ó9?v ("from afar"); it is anything that can be thrown a long distance. Metaphorically, a sword is also called a telum, as in this verse (Vergil, Aen. 9.747):
But (you will not avoid) this telum that my right hand wields with force.
Properly speaking, however, a telum is named for its length - just as we call a weasel mustela because it is longer than a mouse (mus). 11. A cuspis is a thonged spear, named from caespes ("earth") because it is a shoot. Vergil (Aen. 7.817):
And the pastoral myrtle with a spear-point (cuspis) at its head.
Properly speaking, however, the cuspis is the rear part of a spear. 
viii. Arrows (De sagittis) 1. The arrow (sagitta) is named for its 'keen striking' (sagax ictus), that is, its swift striking. It is borne on feathers like a bird so that death might swiftly hasten for a person. The people of Crete first used arrows, on which feathers, as we have said, were glued so that they would be light and fly. 2. Scaptus ... (perhaps cf. scapus, "shaft"). Darts (spiculum) are short arrows or lances, named for their resemblance to 'spikes of wheat' (spica). 3. A 'scorpion' (scorpio) is a poisoned arrow, shot by a bow or a catapult, that releases a poison at the spot where it pierces the person whom it strikes - whence it receives its name scorpio. 
ix. Quivers (De faretris) 1.A quiver (faretra, i.e. phare- tra) is a case for arrows, so named for its 'carrying' (ferre) darts, just as 'bier' (feretrum), where a corpse 'is carried off' (deferre). For this reason these two words have a com- mon etymology, because 'a quiver carries death, and a bier carries a dead person' (pharetra mortem, feretrum mortuum portat). 2. Coriti are properly cases for bows, as quivers are for arrows. A sheath (vagina) is so called because in it a foil or sword is carried. 3. A case (teca, i.e. theca), so named because it covers (tegere) whatever is held in it, with the letter c put for g. Others claim that theca is from a Greek word (cf. 9?m?, "chest"), because something is stored there - whence a storage place for books is called a bibliotheca. 4. Sword-canes (dolon) are wooden sheaths in which a knife is concealed with
the appearance of a cane. Sword-canes are named from 'guile' (dolus), because they trick and deceive by hiding an iron blade under the guise of wood. Commonly peo- ple call them by the Greek name oxus, that is, "sharp" (acutus). Whence among physicians an 'acute' illness is called ò(?±a. 5.A bow (arcus) is so called because it wards off (arcere) the adversary. Hence also those places that ward off the enemy are called 'citadels' (arx, gen. arcis). Again, 'bow' from its appearance, because they are bent 'rather tightly' (artius).
x. Slings (De fundis) 1. The sling (fundum) is so called because from it stones 'are poured' (fundere), that is, cast.
2.A balista (i.e. ballista) is a kind of engine of war named from throwing stones, for in Greek ßa2?±v means 'throw.' It is wound up with a thong of sinew and hurls either spears or stones with great force. Hence it is also called a fundibalus, for its 'pouring forth' (fundere) and casting. A testudo ("siege shed," lit. "tortoise") is an effective defense against the ballista; it is an armored wall made by interlocked shields.
xi. The battering ram (De ariete) 1. The battering ram (aries) gets its name from its appearance, because like a fighting ram (aries) it batters a wall with its impetus. A head of iron is fashioned on a strong and knotty tree- trunk, and, suspended by ropes, the ram is driven against a wall by many hands, and then drawn back it is aimed again with a greater force. Finally, beaten with frequent blows, the side of the wall gives way, and the battering ram breaks through where it has caved in, and makes a breach. 2. Against the thrust of a battering ram the rem- edy is a sack filled with straw and set in the place where the battering ram strikes, for the impact of the thrust of the battering ram is softened in the yielding hollow of the sack. Thus harder things give way rather easily to softer. 3. Plutei are hurdles woven from rawhide that are set up as protection from the enemy when constructing siege-works. 4. A musculus is made like a tunnel, and with it a wall (murus) is undermined; from this it takes its name, as if it were murusculus.
xii. Shields (De clypeis) 1.A 'bronze shield' (clipeus) is a rather large buckler, so called because it shields (cli- peare), that is, it covers, the body and removes it from danger, after the term m2spt?tv (i.e. "steal, disguise"). When it is held opposed to the enemy, by its defense it
guards the body from spears and darts. A clipeus is for foot soldiers, and a buckler (scutum) for horsemen. 2. The buckler (scutum) is so called because with it one 'shakes off' (excutere) the force of missiles. To resist mis- siles, the shield is carried in front. The boss (umbo) of a buckler is the middle part, as if it were the navel (umbili- cus). 3.A short, round shield is called an ancile, of which Vergil (Aen. 7.188):
He carried an ancile with his left hand.
And ancile is so called from 'cutting around' (ancisio), because it is rounded and as if it were 'cut away' (ancisus) on all sides. Ovid (Fasti 3.377):
They call it ancile because it is 'lopped off ' (recisus) on all sides; wherever you look, no angle is present on it.
4. A peltum (i.e. pelta) is a very short buckler shaped like a half moon. The book of Kings records it (cf. III Kings 10.16-17 Vulgate): "King Solomon made two hun- dred bucklers of pure gold and three hundred peltae of fine gold." 5. A [s]cetra (i.e. caetra) is a shield of woven leather without wood, which the Africans and Moors use. About it, the poet (Vergil, Aen. 7.732):
A cetra covers their left arms.
6. A parma is a light shield, as if it were 'small' (parva), and not a clipeus. It is also called a testudo, because this shield is built in the shape of a tortoise-shell (testudo). A testudo is also an interlinking of shields curved in the shape of a tortoise-shell, for soldiers take the names of various types of arms from animals, as 'battering ram' (aries, "ram"). And Sallust (Histories 3.36): "In the shape," he says, "of a military 'hedgehog' (iricius, i.e. ericius, 'spiked barrier')."
xiii. Cuirasses (De loricis) 1. The cuirass (lorica) is so called because it 'lacks thongs' (lorum carere), for it is made only of iron rings. 2. 'Scale-armor' (squama) is an iron cuirass made from iron or bronze plates linked together in the manner of fish scales (squama), and named for their glittering likeness to fish scales. Cuirasses are both polished and protected by 'goat-hair cloth' (cili- cium).
xiv. Helmets (De galeis) 1. The helmet called cassis is made of metal plates, and the galea of leather, for a leather cap is called a galerus. The cassis was named by
the Etruscans, and I think they named that helmet cassis from the word 'head' (caput). 2. The apex is what stands at a helmet's top, where the crest (crista) is attached, and the Greeks call it m?voç - for the conus is the curved peak of a helmet on top of which is the crest.
xv. The Forum (De foro) 1. A forum (forus/forum) is a place for holding trials, so called from 'speaking' (fari, 1st person singular for), [or from King Foroneus, who first gave laws to the Greeks]. This place is also called the Prorostra because the beaks (rostrum) of Carthaginian ships, seized in the Punic wars, were removed and set up in the Roman Forum, to be a sign of this victory. The 'legal forum' (forus) moreover consists of the complaint, the law, and the judge. 2. A complaint (causa) takes its name from the 'event' (casus) from which it arises. The complaint is the basis and origin of a proceeding, not yet opened up for trial and examination. When it is put forward it is a complaint, when it is examined it is a trial, when it is finished, it is the judgment. A trial (iudicium) is so called as if the word were iuris dictio ("a statement of the law"), and judgment (iustitia) as if the word were iuris status ("establishment of the law"). Formerly a trial was called an inquisitio, whence we call the plaintiffs and overseers of trials quaestores or quaesitores.
3. The word 'business' (negotium) means many things: sometimes the 'transaction' of some matter, as opposed to 'leisure'; sometimes the bringing of a complaint, which is a legal dispute. And it is called negotium as if it were 'not leisure' (nec otium), that is, 'an absence of leisure'. We speak of negotium in lawsuits and negotiation (negotiatio) in commerce, where something is traded so that more can be gained. 4. A 'dispute' (iurgium) is so called as if it were 'the chatter of law' (iuris garrium), because those who plead a case debate over the law. Lit- igation (lis) formerly took its name from disputes about boundaries (limes, gen. limitis). About this, Vergil (Aen. 12.898):
A boundary-stone (limes) was laid, to settle litigation (lis) about the field.
5. A lawsuit consists either of argumentation or of evidence. Argumentation never arrives at a proof by means of witnesses or written documents, but it dis- covers (invenire) the truth by investigation alone. Hence it is called argumentation (argumentum), that is, a 'clear discovery' (argutum inventum). Evidence (proba-
tio), however, involves witnesses and the authority of documents.
6. For every trial six persons are needed: a judge, a plaintiff, a defendant, and three witnesses. The word 'judge' (iudex) is so called as if the word were 'telling the law' (ius dicere) to the people, or because he 'decides lawfully' (iure disceptare). But to decide lawfully is to judge justly; he is not a judge if justice is not in him.
7. The plaintiff (accusator) is so called as if the word were adcausator, because he summons 'to a lawsuit' (ad causam) the person whom he cites. The defendant (reus) is named from 'the matter' (res) about which he is pros- ecuted, because even if he is not guilty of the crime, he is nevertheless called the defendant as long as he is being prosecuted in a trial about some matter. 8. In antiquity the witnesses (testes) were called 'those standing over' (superstes, plural superstites), because they were brought forward 'over the status' (super statum) of the lawsuit. Now, with part of the word taken away, they are called testes.
9. A witness is evaluated with regard to condition, nature, and conduct. Condition: whether one is a free person, not a slave - for often a slave, out of fear of the master, suppresses testimony of the truth. Nature: whether one is a man, not a woman. For (Vergil, Aen. 4.569)
Always a changeable and fickle thing is a woman.
Conduct: whether one is upright and untainted in behavior. If good conduct is missing, a person is not trustworthy, for justice cannot keep company with a criminal. 10. There are two kinds of witnesses, either those telling what they have seen, or those revealing what they have heard. Witnesses also are delinquent in two ways: when they utter falsehoods, or cover up true things by their silence.
xvi. Spectacles (De spectaculis) 1. A 'spectacle' in my view is in general the name for a pleasure that corrupts not in itself, but through those things that are done there. Spectacles (spectaculum) are so called because there a public viewing (inspectio) is offered to people. They are also called shows (ludicrum) because they take place at games (ludus) or at feasts. 2. The origin of games is said
to be thus: Lydians from Asia settled as immigrants in Etruria with their leader Tyrrhenus, who had yielded to his brother in a dispute over the kingdom. Therefore, among the other rituals of their superstitions, they also established spectacles in the name of their religion. From there the Romans borrowed the performers who had been brought in, and hence games (ludus) are named from Lydians (Lydius).
Varro, however, says that games were so called from 'amusement' (lusus), because youths on festival days would entertain the populace with the excitement of games. Hence people think of it as the amusement of young people in connection with festival days, temples, and religious ceremonies. 3. There is nothing more to be said now concerning the origin of the word, since the origin of the thing itself is idolatry. Hence games are also called, indiscriminately, Liberalia, in honor of Father Liber. For this reason you should take note of the stain of the origin of spectacles, so that you may not consider as good what took its origin from evil. A game may be gymnastic, or of the circus, or gladiatorial, or theatrical.
xvii. Gymnastic games (De ludo gymnico) 1. A gym- nastic game is the pinnacle of speed and strength. Its place is in the gymnasium, where athletes exercise and the speed of runners is put to the test. Hence it happens that the exercises of nearly all the arts are called gymnasia.
2. Formerly, those competing in such places would gird up their garments, rather than go naked. Then a certain runner took a fall and died when his belt came loose. For this reason in accordance with a decree of the council the magistrate Hippomenes then permitted everyone there- after to exercise naked. Hence it is called a gymnasium (cf. yUµvóç, "naked"), because youths exercise naked in the arena, where they cover only their privates.
xviii. Types of gymnastics (De generibus gymnico- rum) There are five types of gymnastics: jumping, run- ning, throwing, feats of strength, and wrestling. Hence they say that a certain king, who had that same num- ber of adolescent sons, ordered them to compete for the kingdom in that many types of gymnastics.
xix. The jump (De saltu) A jump (saltus) is so called as if it were 'to leap on high' (exsilire in altum), for jumping concerns leaping higher or farther.
xx. 
The race (De cursu) A race (cursus) is named for swiftness of legs (crus, gen. cruris), for running concerns swiftness of foot.
xxi. The throw (De iactu) The throw (iactus) is named from throwing (iacere). Hence a fisherman's cast-net is called a iaculum. The exercise of this skill involves taking up stones and hurling them a long way, balancing spears and throwing them, and shooting arrows from a bow.
xxii. Feats of strength (De virtute) Feats of strength (virtus) involve high levels of physical strength (vis, plu- ral vires) deployed in exertion and in weight-lifting.
xxiii. Wrestling (De luctatione) Wrestling (luctatio) is so called from the gripping of flanks (latus) by which the fighters bear down in hand-to-hand struggle. Wrestlers are referred to by the Greek term 'athlete' (athleta).
xxiv. The palestra (De palaestra) A wrestling place is called a palestra (palaestra). The term, they say, derives either from the term p?2?, that is, 'wrestling,' or from p?22?tv, that is, 'a movement of a powerful overthrow' - doubtless because in wrestling, when they grasp one another's middles, they almost crush them, and that is called p?22?tv in Greek. Some suppose that the art of wrestling was revealed by the fighting of bears, for among all the beasts they alone stand erect in their grappling, and quickly crouch and turn back, and by turns some- times attack with their paws and sometimes avoid grap- pling, in the manner of wrestlers.
xxv. Competitions (De agone) What in Latin are 'com- petitions' (certamen) are called in Greek ?y?v?ç, from the crowds in which they were celebrated: indeed, any gathering or convening is called an agon. Others think they are called agons because they are produced in arenas that are ring-shaped - as if the word were agonia, that is, 'without corners' (sine angulo; cf. yYv(c)a, "angle").
xxvi. Types of competitions (De generibus agonum) The types of competitions were: greatness of strength, swiftness inrunning, skill at archery, endurance in stand- ing still, movement in marching to lyre or pipes, and also competitions over good character, beauty, singing, and further, over skill in land war and naval battle, and con- tests about withstanding torments.
xxvii. Circus games (De ludis circensibus) 1. The cir- cus games were established for the sake of sacred rites and celebrations of the pagan gods; hence, those who watch them are seen to be devoted to demons' cults. Formerly, simple equestrian events were performed, and the common custom was not at all deserving of censure, but when this natural practice developed into public games it was converted into the worship of demons. 2. And so this kind of competition was dedicated to Castor and Pollux, to whom, the stories teach us, horses were granted by Mercury. Neptune also is a god of the eques- trian game, and the Greeks call him ¯pptoç (cf. ¯ppoç, "horse"); horses in the games are also consecrated to both Mars and Jupiter, and it is they who preside over the four-horse chariots.
3. The circus (circensis) games are so called either from 'going in a circle' (circumire), or because, where the turning-posts are now, formerly swords were set up which the chariots would go around - and hence they were called circenses games after the 'swords around' (ensis + circa) which they would run. And indeed, those driving chariots on the shore along the banks of rivers would set up swords in a row at the riverbank, and part of the art of horsemanship was to wheel around these dangerous obstacles. From this the circenses games are thought to have been named, as if the term were 'around swords' (circum enses).
xxviii. The circus (De circo) 1. The circus was chiefly dedicated by the pagans to the sun god, whose shrine was in the middle of the racetrack and whose effigy shone out from the gable of the shrine, because they did not think that he, whom they believed was in the open, ought to be worshipped under a roof. A circus is the whole space that horses would race around. 2. The Romans think that it was called circus from the 'circuit' (circuitus) of horses, because there the horses race around (circum) the turning-posts. But the Greeks say it was named after Circe, daughter of the sun god, who founded this kind of competition in honor of her father, and from her name they argue that the term circus derived. Moreover, she was a sorceress and a witch and a priestess of demons; in her conduct we may recognize both the working of the magical arts and the cult of idolatry.
xxix. The apparatus (De ornamentis) 1. The appara- tus of the circus comprises the 'eggs,' the turning posts,
the obelisk, and the starting-gate. Some people say the 'eggs' (i.e. objects used to mark the number of circuits of the chariots) are in honor of Pollux and Castor; these same people do not blush to believe that these two were begotten from an egg sired by Jupiter as a swan. 2. The Romans claim that the circus games represent the first principles of the world, so that under this pretext they may excuse the superstitions of their own empty beliefs.
xxx. The turning-posts (De metis) Properly by the term 'turning-posts' (meta) people mean to designate the end-point and boundary of the world, from the fact that the end is 'measured out' (emetiri) in some way, or as a token of the rising and setting of the sun.
xxxi. The obelisk (De obelisco) 1. Mesfres, king of Egypt, is said to have been the first to make an obelisk, for the following reason. Because the Nile once had dam- aged Egypt with a violent flood, the indignant king, as if to exact a penalty from the river, shot an arrow into the water. Not long afterwards, seized by a serious illness, he lost his sight, and once his vision was restored after this blindness he consecrated two obelisks to the sun god. 'Obelisk' (obeliscus) is the name of the arrow that is set up in the middle of the circus because the sun runs through the middle of the world. 2. Moreover, the obelisk, set up in the midpoint of the space of the racetrack equidis- tant from the two turning-posts, represents the peak and summit of heaven, since the sun moves across it at the midpoint of the hours, equidistant from either end of its course. Set on top of the obelisk is a gilded object shaped like a flame, for the sun has an abundance of heat and fire within it.
xxxii. The starting-gates (De carceribus) In the circus the places from which the horses are loosed are called starting-gates (carcer), for the same reason that prisons (carcer) in a city are so named - because, just as humans are condemned and imprisoned there, so horses are 'con- fined' (coercere) here so that they may not start off before the signal is given.
xxxiii. Charioteers (De aurigis) 1. The art of the circus comprises the charioteer and the race, people on horse- back or on foot. The charioteer (auriga) is properly so called because he 'drives and guides' (agere et regere), or because he 'beats' (ferire) the yoked horses, for one who
'gouges' (aurire) is one who 'beats' (ferire), as (Vergil,
Aen. 10.314):
He gouges (aurire, i.e. haurire, lit. "drink") the open side.
2.A charioteer is alsoa driver (agitator), that is, a whip- per, so called from 'driving' (agere). Further, charioteers wear two colors, with which they make a display of their idolatry, for the pagans dedicated the green to the earth and the blue to the sky and sea.
xxxiv. The team of four (De quadrigis) 1. Ericthonius, who ruled Athens, is said to have been the first to yoke together four horses, for which Vergil is the authority, saying (Geo. 3.113):
Ericthonius first dared to yoke a chariot and four horses, and to stand as victor on swift wheels.
2. He was, as the legends say, the son of Minerva and Vulcan, born from the evidence of Vulcan's lust spilled on the earth, as a demonic portent, or rather as a devil himself. He first dedicated the chariot to Juno. From such a founder were 'four-horse chariots' (quadriga) invented.
xxxv. The chariot (De curru) 1. The chariot (currus) takes its name from 'racing' (cursus), or because it is seen to have [many] wheels - thence also a 'two-wheeled wagon' (carrus), as if it were currus. The quadriga (i.e. a chariot with a team of four) formerly had a double and unbroken tongue, which linked all the horses with a single yoke. 2. Cleisthenes of Sicyon was first to yoke only the middle pair of horses, and to connect to them the other two on each side with a single band. These outer two the Greeks call o?tpa??ópot and the Latins call 'trace-horses' (funarius), from the kind of band (cf. funis, "rope") with which they were formely linked.
xxxvi. The horses with which we race (De equis qui- bus currimus) 1. The quadriga, biga, triga, and seiuga (i.e. four-, two-, three-, and six-horse chariots) are named from the number of horses and the word 'yoke' (iugum). The quadriga is dedicated to the sun, the biga to the moon, the triga to the underworld, the seiuga to Jupiter, and the horse-vaulters (desultor) to Lucifer and Hesperus. They associate the quadriga with the sun because the year rolls through four seasons: spring, sum- mer, autumn, and winter. 2. The biga with the moon,
because it travels on a twin course with the sun, or because it is visible both by day and by night - for they yoke together one black horse and one white. The triga is consecrated to the infernal gods because they draw people to themselves in each of three ages - that is, infancy, youth, and old age. The seiuga, the largest char- iot, races for Jupiter, because they think him the great- est of their gods. 3. Furthermore, they say that chariots race on wheels (rota) either because the world whirls by with the speed of its circle, or because of the sun, which wheels (rotare) in a circular orbit, as Ennius says (Annals 558):
Thence the shining wheel (rota) cleared the sky with its rays.
xxxvii. The seven laps (De septem spatiis) Chariots run seven laps (spatium), with reference to the courses of the seven planets by which they say the world is controlled, or to the course of the seven stages of life; when these stages have been completed, the end of life is reached. The end of these laps is the goal line (creta), that is, judgment (cf. cernere, ppl. cretus, "decide, judge").
xxxviii. The riders (De equitibus) They say the rid- ers (eques) race alone because each person traverses and completes the course of this life alone, one following another at different times, but through one path of mor- tality up to its own turning-post of death.
xxxix. Horse-vaulters (De desultoribus) Horse- vaulters (desultores) are so called because formerly as each one came to the end of the course he would 'leap down' (desilire) and run, or because he would 'vault across' (transilire) from one horse to another.
xl. Foot racers (De peditibus) People speak of 'foot racers' (pedes) since they run on foot (pes, gen. pedis), because one makes a footrace toward one's death. Because of this they run from the higher side to the lower, that is, from the direction of sunrise to sunset, because mortals rise up and then fall. They race naked because in a similar way no remains survive for a person in this world. They run a straight course because there is no distance between life and death. But they contrive these explanations in their effort to excuse their empty beliefs and sacrilege.
xli. The colors worn by horses (De coloribus equo- rum) 1. The pagans also associate, in a similar way, the colors decking the horses with the first principles of the elements, linking red with the sun, that is, with fire, white with air, green with earth, and blue with water. According to them, the reds race for summer, because it is the fiery color, and everything turns gold then. The whites for winter, because it is icy, and everything turns white in the cold. The greens for spring, from its green color, because then the young shoots grow thick. 2. Again, they dedi- cate those racing in red to Mars, from whom the Romans descend, and because the standards of the Romans are embellished with scarlet, or because Mars delights in blood. Those in white are dedicated to the zephyrs and mild weather; the greens to flowers and the earth; the blues to water or air, because they are of sky-blue color; the saffrons or yellows to fire and the sun; the purples to Iris, whom we call the rainbow, because it has many colors.
3. Thus, since in this spectacle they pollute themselves with the cult of their gods and with the cosmic elements, they are most certainly known to worship those same gods and elements. Hence, Christian, you should pay attention to the fact that unclean divinities possess the circus. For this reason that place, which many of Satan's spirits have haunted, will be alien to you, for the devil and his angels have entirely filled it.
xlii. The theater (De theatro) 1. A theater is the enclo- sure for a stage, having a semi-circular shape, in which all those watching stand. Its shape was originally round, like an amphitheater, but afterwards, from half an amphitheater, it became a theater. The word 'theater' (theatrum) derives from 'a spectacle,' from the word 9?Yp(c)a, because the people standing in it observe the plays, watching from above. 2. But indeed a theater is the same as a brothel (prostibulum), because when the plays are finished prostitutes 'stretch themselves out' (prostrari) there. It is likewise called a whore- house (lupanar, plural lupanaria) because of those same prostitutes who are called she-wolves (lupa) from the loose conduct of their widely-shared bodies. Pros- titutes are called she-wolves for their rapaciousness, because they seize upon wretches and ensnare them. Lupanaria were established by the pagans in order to make public the shame of fallen women, and so that the men who engage prostitutes might be held up to
the same ridicule as the women who make themselves available.
xliii. The stage building (De scena) The stage building (scena) was a place in the lower part of a theater built like a house, with a platform (pulpitus) which was called the orchestra, where the comic and tragic performers would sing and where the actors and mimes would per- form. The scena is named after a Greek word (i.e. om?v?, "tent") because it was built to look like a house. Hence also in Hebrew the Feast of the Tabernacles was called om?vop?yta from their similarity to domiciles.
xliv. The orchestra (De orchestra) The orchestra was the platform part of the stage setting, where a dancer could perform, or two actors could engage in dialogue. The comic and tragic poets would mount there in their contests, and along with their chanting others would per- form the movements. Occupations connected with the stage include tragedians, writers of comedy, musicians, actors, mimes, and dancers.
xlv. Tragedians (De tragoedis) Tragedians (tragoedus) are those who would sing for the audience in poetry about the ancient deeds and lamentable crimes of wicked kings.
xlvi. Writers of comedy (De comoedis) Writers of comedy (comoedus) are those who would recount in word and gesture the deeds of common people, and in their plots would represent the defiling of virgins and the love affairs of courtesans.
xlvii. Stage musicians (De thymelicis) Thymelici were the stage musicians who would begin with music on pipes, lyres, and lutes. They are called thymelici because formerly they would perform standing in the orchestra on a raised platform that was called a thymele.
xlviii. Actors (De histrionibus) Actors (histrio) are those who, dressed as women, would represent the deeds of shameless women. They also would show stories and events by dancing. They are called histriones either because that kind of acting was imported from the coun- try Histria (i.e. Istria), or because they would present legends entwined with history (historia), as if they were historiones.
xlix. Mimes (De mimis) Mimes (mimus) are named from a Greek word (i.e. µ±µoç) because they are imita- tors (imitatores) of human activity. They had their own narrator, who would tell the plot before they performed their mime. For dramatic tales were composed by poets in such a way that they would be very suitable for move- ments of the body.
l. Dancers (De saltatoribus) Varro says dancers (salta- tor) were named after the Arcadian Salius, whom Aeneas brought with him into Italy, and who first taught noble Roman youths to dance.
li. What should be performed under which patron (Quid quo patrono agatur) The patronage of Liber and Venus is evident in the theater arts, those arts, peculiar to and characteristics of the stage, that involve gesture and sinuous bodily movement. Indeed, dissolute people would offer up their depravity to Liber and Venus - to the latter through their sexuality, to the former through their extravagance. But what is performed there by voice and rhythm, pipe and lyre, has as its patrons Apollos, the Muses, Minervas, and Mercuries. Christian, you should hate any spectacle whose patrons you hate.
lii. The amphitheater (De amphitheatro) 1. The amp- hitheater is the arena for spectacles where gladiators fight. And a school of gladiators (gladiator) is so called because in it youths learn the use of arms with vari- ous moves, at one time competing among themselves with swords (gladius) or fists, at another going out against wild animals. There, enticed not by hatred but by pay, they undergo deadly combat. 2. The amphithe- ater (amphitheatrum) is so called because it is com- posed of two theaters, for an amphitheater is round, whereas a theater, having a semicircular shape, is half an amphitheater.
liii. The equestrian game (De ludo equestri) There are several kinds of gladiatorial games, of which the first is the equestrian game. In it, after military standards had first entered, two horsemen would come out, one from the east side and the other from the west, on white horses, bearing small gilded helmets and light weapons. In this way, with fierce perseverance, they would bravely enter combat, fighting until one of them should spring forward upon the death of the other, so that the one who fell would have defeat, the one who slew, glory. People armed like this used to fight for the sake of Mars Duellius.
liv. Net-fighters (De retiariis) The net-fighter (retiar- ius) is named for his type of weapon. In a gladiato- rial game he would carry hidden from view a net (rete) against the other fighter; it is called a 'casting-net' (iacu- lum), so that he might enclose the adversary armed with a spear, and overcome him by force when he is tangled in it. These fighters were fighting for Neptune, because of the trident.
lv. Pursuers (De secutoribus) The pursuer (secutor) is named because he pursues (insequi, ppl. insecutus) net- fighters, for he would wield a spear and a lead ball that would impede the casting-net of his adversary so that he might overwhelm him before he could strike with the net. Thesecombatantswerededicatedto Vulcan, because fire always pursues. And the pursuer was matched with the net-fighter because fire and water are always enemies.
lvi. Ensnarers (De laqueariis) The combat strategy of ensnarers (laquearius) was to throw a noose (laqueus) over opponents protected by leather shields as they were fleeing in the game, and after disabling them pursue them and bring them to the ground.
lvii. Skirmishers (De velitibus) The fighting done by skirmishers was to hurl missiles on this side and that. Theirs was a varied form of combat, and more pleasing to the spectators than the others. The skirmishers (veles, plural velites) were named either from 'flying through the air' (volitatio) or from the Etruscan city that was called Veles.
lviii. Combat to the death (De ferali certamine) Com- bat with wild animals (fera) involved youths confronting beasts after they were released and battling against them, voluntarily courting death, not because they were con- demned to do so, but because of their own passion.
lix. The performance of these games (De horum exercitatione ludorum) Surely these spectacles of cru- elty and the attendance at vain shows were established not only by the vices of humans, but also at the behest of demons. Therefore Christians should have nothing to do with the madness of the circus, the immodesty of the theater, the cruelty of the amphitheater, the atrocity of the arena, the debauchery of the games. Indeed, a person who takes up such things denies God, having become an apostate from the Christian faith, and seeks anew what
he renounced in baptism long before - namely, the devil and his pomps and works.
lx. The gaming-board (De tabula) Dicing (alea), that is, the game played at the gaming-board (tabula), was invented by the Greeks during lulls of the Trojan War by a certain soldier named Alea, from whom the practice took its name. The board game is played with a dice- tumbler, counters, and dice.
lxi. Dice-tumblers (De pyrgis) The dice-tumbler (pyr- gus) is so called because dice 'pass through' (pergere) it, or because it is shaped like a tower - for the Greeks call a tower pápyoç.
lxii. Gaming counters (De calculis) Counters (calcu- lus) are so called because they are smooth and round. Hence a pebble is also called a calculus, which because of its small size may be 'walked on' (calcare) harmlessly. Again, calculi, because they are moved along the tracks laid out on the board, as if along 'paths' (callis).
lxiii. Dice (De tesseris) Dice (tessera) are so called because they are squared off (cf. tsooap?ç, "four") on all sides. Others call them 'young hares' (lepuscu- lus), because they scatter with a bound. Formerly dice were called 'throwing pieces' (iaculum), from 'throwing' (iacere).
lxiv. The figurative senses of dicing (De figuris aleae) Furthermore, certain dice-players think that they per- form their art by way of an allegory of natural science, and conceive of it as bearing a certain likeness to natu- ral phenomena. They maintain that they play with three dice because of the three tenses of the world - present, past, and future - because they do not stand still but tum- ble down. They also hold that the paths on the board are divided into six regions, for the ages of a human, and in three lines, for the three tenses. Hence they say that a gaming-board is marked off in three lines.
lxv. Dicing terms (De vocabulis tesserarum) Theplay- ers of antiquity would call each throw by a number, as a one, [a two,] a three, a four, [a five,] a six. Later the
terms for several were changed, and the one was called the 'dog' (canis), the three the 'face-down' (suppus), and the four the 'flat' (planus).
lxvi. The casting of dice (De iactu tesserarum) The casting of dice is so managed by experienced dice- throwers that the throw comes out as intended - for example it comes out as a six, which is a good throw for them. But they avoid the canis because it is a bad throw, for it means the one-spot.
lxvii. The moving of counters (De calculorum motu) Counters (calculus) are moved partly in a fixed order (ordo, gen. ordinis) and partly at random (vage). Hence they call some counters ordinarius, and others vagus. But those that are entirely unable to be moved they call 'the unmoved' (incitus). Hence people in need are also called inciti - those for whom there remains no hope of advancing farther.
lxviii. The banning of dicing (De interdictione aleae) Fraud and lying and perjury are never absent from games of chance, and finally both hatred and ruin. Hence at certain times, because of these crimes, they have been banned by the laws.
lxix. Ball games (De pila) 1. A ball (pila) is properly so called because it is stuffed with hair (pilus). It is also a 'sphere' (sfera, i.e. sphera), so called from 'carrying' (ferre) or 'striking' (ferire). Concerning the type and weight of these, Dorcatius thus reports (fr. 1):
Nor spare to stuff in the hair of the lively deer until an ounce has been added over two pounds. 
2. Among the types of ball games are 'trigon-ball' (trigo- naria) and 'arena-ball' (arenata). Trigonaria is so named because it is played by three (tres; cf. ?yÛv, "contest") players. Arena-ball, which is played in a group, when, as the ball is thrown in from the circle of bystanders and spectators, they would catch it beyond a set distance and begin the game. They call it the 'elbow-game' (cubitalis) when two people at close quarters and with their elbows (cubitum) almost joined strike the ball. Those who pass the ball to their fellow players by striking it with the out- stretched lower leg are said to 'give it the calf' (suram dare).
