i. Cities (De civitatibus) 1. Frequently we find dissen- sion about who was responsible for the founding of cities, to such an extent that not even the origin of the city of Rome can accurately be known. Thus Sallust says (War with Catiline 6), "As I understand it, at first the Trojans, and with them the native peoples, first founded and settled the city of Rome." Others say the founding was by Evander, as Vergil (Aen. 8.313):
Then King Evander, founder of the Roman citadel . . . 
Others, by Romulus, as (Vergil, Aen. 6.781):
Behold, my son, under his (i.e. Romulus's) auspices that illustrious Rome . . . 
2. Hence if no sure account of so greata city is available, it is no wonder that there is some doubt about opinion concerning other cities. Therefore we should not igno- rantly condemn the historians and commentators who allege various things, for antiquity itself created the error. It is indeed proper to treat briefly some cities concern- ing which either the Sacred Scriptures or pagan histories reliably report the origin.
3. Before the Flood, Cain was the first to found a city, the city of Enoch in Naid, after the name of his son, and he filled that city with only the throng of his own descendants. 4. After the Flood, the giant Nim- rod (Nembroth) first founded the Mesopotamian city of Babylon. Queen Semiramis of the Assyrians enlarged it, and made the wall of the city with bitumen and fired brick. Babylon takes its name from 'confusion', because there the languages of those building the tower were confused and mixed up. 5. The Jews say that Noah's son Shem (Sem), whom they call Melchizedech, was the first to found a city after the Flood, Salem in Syria, in which this same Melchizedech ruled. Afterwards the Jebusites held it, from whom it got the name Jebus.
Thus Jerusalem (Hierusalem) was named, from the cou- pling of the two names Jebus (Iebus) and Salem. Later it was called Hierosolyma by Solomon, as if it were Hiero-solomonia (cf. ¬?póç, "holy"). It is also named by the poets, incorrectly, Solyma, and later it was called Aelia by Aelius Hadrian. [Within] it is also Zion, which means "lookout" (speculatio) in Hebrew, because it is built on a height and looks out on things approaching from afar. Jerusalem means "peaceable" (pacificus) in our language. 
Famous towns, and which men or women established them (Oppida nobilia, qui vel quae constituerunt)
6. Dionysius (i.e. Dionysus, the god of wine), who is also Father Liber, when as conqueror he walked through India, founded the city Nysa next to the river Indus, named it after his own name, and filled it with fifty thou- sand people. 7. Medus, son of Aegius, built Media, and from it his country of Media took its name. 8. Perseus, son of Adea, founded the city Persepolis, capital of the realm of Persia, very famous and stuffed with riches. Persia (Persida) was also named from him 9. The Parthi- ans also founded Ctesiphon in Parthia in emulation of the city of Babylon. 10. They say that Memnon's brother established the city of Susa in Persia. It was named Susa because it overlooks the river Susa. The royal palace of Cyrus is there, distinguished by its white and variegated stone, with golden columns and paneled ceilings and jewels, even containing a replica of the sky embellished with twinkling stars, and other things beyond human belief.
11. The Bactrians founded the city of Bactrum, naming it after its river Bactros. 12. Carrhae, a city of Mesopotamia beyond Edessa, was founded by the Parthians. A Roman army was once slaughtered there, and its general Crassus was captured. 13. Nimrod (Nem- broth), son of Chus, founded the Mesopotamian city Edessa after he moved from Babylon, and he reigned there. Formerly it was called Arach. He also built
Chalane, which afterwards, its name changed by king Seleucus, was called Seleucia. The Raphaim, a very ancient people whom the sons of Lot killed, founded the city Philadelphia of Arabia. 14. Seleucus, one of Alexan- der's followers, after the death of the same Alexander, having seized the rule of the East, founded a city in Syria and named it Antioch after the name of his father, Anti- ochus, and made it the capital of Syria. The same man also built the cities of Laodicea and Seleucia, Apamea and Edessa. 15. Damascus of Syria was founded and named by Damascus, son of Abraham's steward. This formerly was the chief city in all Syria, for Antioch, Laodicea, and Apamea were not yet flourishing there - we know that these cities were built after Alexander's time. This is the Damascus that Abraham called his future heir, before Isaac was promised to him.
16. The Eveians founded the city of Gaza in Palestine, in which the Cappadocians lived after the original inhab- itants were killed. It was called Gaza, because Cambyses, king of the Persians, located his treasury there when he waged war against Egypt - for in Persian a 'treasury' is called gaza. 17. The Allophyli (allophylus, lit. "foreigner") founded the city of the Philistines; it is Ascalon, of which we have spoken above, named after Chasluim (Cesloim), who was the grandson of Ham and son of Mesraim. 18. The city of Dor was once very powerful; in turn it was known as the Tower of Straton, and afterwards named Caesarea by Herod, King of Judea, in honor of Caesar Augustus. In this city the Church of Christ witnessed the house of Cornelius, and the little rooms of Philip, and the chamber of the four virgin prophetesses (see Acts 10:1 and 21:8-9).
19. The Palestinians built the seaside city Joppe of Palestine. There a rock is displayed which still retains traces of the fetters of Andromeda; it has the shape of a sea-monster larger than an elephant. 20. Jericho is said to have been founded by the Jebusites, from whom, it is held, it also took its name. Joshua overthrew it. After that Ozam of Bethel, of the tribe of Ephraim, built another Jericho. But this also, when Jerusalem was attacked by the Romans, was seized and destroyed, due to the treachery of its citizens; because of this a third city was built, and this remains today. 21. Emor built the Samarian city Sichem, which is called Sichima in Latin and Greek, and named it after the name of his son Sichem. It is now Neapolis, a Samaritan city.
22. The Jebusites founded Bethel, a city of Samaria. Earlier it was called Luz, but afterwards Jacob, sleeping
there, saw the ladder stretching up to heaven and said (Genesis 28:17), "Truly this is the house of God, and the gate of heaven." Hence the place got the name Bethel, that is, "house of God." But when golden calves were forged there by Jeroboam (III Kings 12:28 Vulgate), what was earlier called the house of God was called Bethaven, that is, "the house of the idol." 23. Bethlehem of Judah, the city of David, which gave birth to the Savior of the world, is said to have been founded by the Jebusites and first called Euphrata. But when Jacob pastured his cattle there, with a certain prophecy of the future he gave the same place the name Bethlehem, which means "house of bread," because of him, the Bread who descended from heaven there.
24. Hebron (Chebron), the city of Judea that for- merly was called Arbe, was founded by giants seven years before they founded the Egyptian city of Tanis. It was thus named 'Arbe' from the number (cf. Hebrew arba, "four"), because there three patriarchs were buried, and Adam was the fourth. It is also called 'Mambre' after a friend of Abraham. 25. Sennacherib, king of the Assyrians, built Samaria, from which the whole region that surrounded it took its name, and he called it 'Samaria,' that is, 'The Watch,' because when he deliv- ered Israel into the hands of the Medes he set watch- men there. Antiochus leveled it when it was taken by siege. Later Herod restored it from its founda- tions, and he called it 'Augusta' in honor of Augus- tus, which is 'Sebaste' (Sebastia) in Greek. There the prophets Elisha and Abdias were buried, and John the Baptist; there was no greater among those born of women than he. 26. Another Herod (i.e. Herod Antipas) founded Tiberias in Judea, in the name of Tiberius Caesar.
27. The Phoenician city Tyre was founded by the Phoenicians. This is the city from which gold was brought down for King Solomon, and that in which the best purple cloth is dyed, whence the noble purple is called 'Tyrian.' 28. The Phoenicians, having migrated from the Red Sea, founded the very rich city Sidon, which they called Sidon from its abundance of fish, for Phoenicians call a fish sidon. They founded Tyre in Syria, Utica in Africa, as well as Hippo, Leptis, and other cities on seacoasts. 29. They built Thebes in Boeotia under the command of Cadmus; later, reaching the farthest part of the world, they built a city by the Ocean and named it Gades (i.e. Cadiz) in their language. It was an ancient custom for many of the Phoenician people to
set off from home together for the purpose of trading, and when they had won over the hearts of the natives by the trading of goods previously unknown to them, they would then take over those places that seemed suit- able for founding cities. 30. When Dido, also a Phoeni- cian, had journeyed to the shore of Africa, she founded a city and named it Carthada, which in Phoenician meant "new city." Later, with altered pronunciation it was called Carthage (Carthago). Scipiodestroyed it; what exists there now was founded afterwards by the Romans. Carthage was once named Byrsa, later Tyrus, finally Carthage.
31. Epaphas, son of Jupiter, built the Egyptian city of Memphis when he ruled over a prosperous Egypt. This is the city where papyrus sheets are produced, and where the best mathematicians lived. Traces of their former error reveal that this city has been devoted to the magi- cal arts up to the present time. 32. Tanis is the metropolis in Egypt where Pharaoh lived and Moses performed all the miracles that are written about in the book of Exo- dus. The Titans, that is 'giants,' are said to have built it and named it after their own name. 33. Heliopolis is an Egyptian city, which in Latin means "City of the Sun," as the Septuagint translators have it. But it was built by the children of Israel, and the priest Petephres, whom Ezekiel mentions, lived there.
34. Alexander the Great founded the city of Alexan- dria, and it preserves his name. He established it at the boundary of Egypt and Africa and commanded that it be the capital of the province of Egypt. It lies between Egypt and the sea, as if it were a gate, as it had no har- bor. This is the Egyptian city of No (Noo), later turned into Alexandria. 35. Cadmus founded Egyptian Thebes, which is held to be quite famous among Egyptian cities for the number of its gates; Arab people transport articles of commerce to it from everywhere. The Egyptian region Thebaica is named after it. There is a Thebes in Boeotia and a Thebes in Egypt, but both were established by one founder.
36. Ptolomais and Berenice were named after the Egyptian rulers by whom they were built. 37. Caesarea
of Cappadocia.  38. Perseus, offspring of Danae, built
Tarsus of Cilicia. The apostle Paul was from this city (Acts 22:3): "I was born," he says, "at Tarsus in Cilicia." A certain place in India is also called Tarsus. Seleucus founded Seleucia of Isauria, as well as Antioch. Ilus, son of Apollo, founded Ilium in Phrygia. 39. The Amazons built Ephesus in Asia. Theseus built Smyrna, which came to prominence as the home of the poet Homer. It is called 'Smyrna' because the river Ermus cuts through its fields. 40. Amphitus and Cercius, the charioteers of Castor and Pollux, constructed Dioscoria, the city of the Colchians, naming it after their name, for Castor and Pollux in Greek are called the ?tóomoUpot. 41. Nicome- dia was built by Nicomedes, king of Bithynia. Bithynia, which was first called Mariandyna, was founded by Phoenix.
42. Constantine imposed his own name on the Thra- cian city of Constantinople; it alone is the equal of Rome in importance and power. It was first founded by Pausa- nias, king of the Spartans, and called Byzantium, either because it extends 'so much' (tantum) between the Adri- atic Sea and the Propontis, or because it is a 'place for storage' (receptaculum) for the wealth of land and sea. Hence Constantine decided to found this most suitable city, so that it would also become for him a refuge by land and sea. For this reason it is now also the seat of the Roman Empire and the head of the entire East, as Rome is of the West.
43. The Thracian city of Epirus (Epirum) was founded by and named after Pyrrhus. 44. Cecrops founded Athens in Greece (Hellas), and named it 'Cecropia' after him- self. Amphictyon, the same who reigned in Greece third after Cecrops, dedicated this city to Minerva and gave the name 'Athens' (Athenae) to the city, for Minerva in Greek is called %9?v?. Hence also the Greeks claim that Minerva is the inventor of many arts, because literature, and the arts of many schools, and philosophy itself have considered Athens as their temple. 45. Corinthus, son of Orestes, founded Corinth in Achaea. The Greeks call it Corinthea, that is, 'the administration of the state.' 
46. Cadmus, coming from Phoenicia, founded Boeotian Thebes after he built Egyptian Thebes. 47. Mycenae [a Greek city] . . . 
Lacedaemonia was founded by Lacedaemon, son of Semele. Sparta is named after Spartus, son of Phoroneus, who was the son of Inachus. Sparta is the same as the city Lacedaemonia, and hence Spartans are called Lacedae- monians. 48. Achaea was built by Achaeus; Pelops,
who ruled among the Argives, founded the city of Peloponnensis; Cecrops built Rhodes on the island of Rhodes; Carpathus built Cos; Aeos, son of Typhon, built Paphos; Angeus, son of Lycurgus, built Samos; Dard- anus founded Dardania. Thessalus, son of Graecus, built Thessalonica, and he also ruled there. 49. The Greeks built Brundisium (i.e. Brindisi), and it is called Brundi- sium in Greek because brunda means "head of a stag," for it is the case that in the shape of the city may be seen the horns and head and tongue. 
50. In Italy Janiculum was founded by Janus, and Sat- urnia and Latium by Saturn, the latter so named because there in his flight he hid (latere). 51. Pompeii was founded in Campania by Hercules, who as victor had led a tri- umphal procession (pompa) of oxen from Spain. 52. Aeneas, coming into this same Italy after the destruc- tion of Troy, founded Lavinium after the name of his wife. 53. But Ascanius, after he had left his kingdom to his stepmother Lavinia, built Alba Longa. It was called Alba, 'White,' because of the color of a sow, and Longa because the town is elongated, in keeping with the great extent of the hill on which it is sited. From the name of this city the kings of the Albans took their names. 54. Capys Silvius, king of the Albans, built Capua, named after its founder, although some say Capua was named from 'capacity' (capacitas), because its land holds (capere) all produce for living, and others say from the flat (campester) land in which it is situated. Further, it is the chief city of Cam- pania, named with Rome and Carthage among the three greatest cities. The Italian province Campania is named after it.
55. Romulus - when he had restored his grandfa- ther Numitor to his reign after Amulius had been killed at Alba - came down to the place where Rome now is and established a settlement there, built walls, and called the city Rome after his own name. But Evander is said to have founded it earlier, as in this line (Vergil, Aen. 8.313):
Then father Evandrus, founder of the Roman citadel . . . 
56. Ancus Marcius was born from the daughter of Numa Pompilius; he founded a city at the mouth of the Tiber that would receive foreign goods and would ward off the enemy. From its site he named it Ostia ("entrance").
57. Certain Gauls, driven by their civil discord and incessant dissensions, set out for Italy seeking new terri- tory, and after the Etruscans (Tuscus) had been expelled
from their own land, they founded Mediolanum (i.e. Milan) and other cities. It was called Mediolanum because a sow that was 'woolly around the middle' (medio lanea) is said to have been found there. 58. Histo- rians believe that Messapia owes its origin to the Greek Messapus. Originally Peucetius, brother of Oenotrus, named it Peucetia; afterwards the name was changed to Calabria. 59. They say that Manto, the daughter of Tiresias, brought to Italy after the destruction of the Thebans, founded Mantua; it is in the Venetian territory which is called Cisalpine Gaul, and it is called Mantua because it 'looks after its departed spirits' (manestuetur).
60. Parthenope was named Parthenope after the name of Parthenope, a certain maiden buried there. After- wards Augustus preferred to call the town Neapolis (i.e. Naples). 61. Augustus waged war against Antony off the promontory Leucata, on which there was a temple of Actian Apollo. After Antony was defeated, he founded a city on the bay of Actium which he named Nicopolis (i.e. "city of victory") because of his victory.
62. Phalantus, leader of the Parthenians, founded Parthenii. Taras was the son of Neptune, and he founded and named the city of Tarentum. 63. When Cyrus besieged the maritime cities of Greece, and the Pho- caeans attacked by him were brought to perilous straits, they swore that they would flee as far as possible from the Persian empire, where they would not even hear its name. So, having traveled to the farthest harbors of Gaul in their ships, trusting in their arms against the ferocity of the Gauls, they founded Massilia (i.e. Marseilles) and named it after their leader's name. Varro says they were trilingualbecausetheyspoke Greek, Latin, and Gallic. 64. Their own colonists founded Narbona (i.e. Narbonne), Arelatum (i.e. Arles), and Pictavia (i.e. Poitiers). They say that Burdigalis (i.e. Bordeaux) was so named because first it had the Burgian Gauls (Burgos Gallos) as colonists, and it was filled with these farmers at an earlier time.
65. The Scipios built Terracona (i.e. Tarragona) in Spain; hence it is capital of the province of Tarragon.
66. [Caesar Augustus both situated and named Caesa- raugusta (i.e. Saragossa) in the province of Tarragon, a city in Spain. With the loveliness of its situation and its charming features it stands out among all the cities of Spain and is famous, distinguished for its tombs of
holy martyrs.] 67. The Africans, occupying the coasts of Spain under Hannibal, built New Carthage (Carthago Spartaria; i.e. Cartagena). Later taken and made a colony by the Romans, it gave its name to a province. But now it has been overthrown and reduced to desolation by the Goths. 68. Greeks from the island of Zacynthus, who had traveled to Spain, founded Saguntum (i.e. Sagunto). Later the Africans destroyed it in the onslaught of war.
69. Caesar Augustus built Emerita (i.e. Merida) after he had seized the region of Lusitania and certain islands of the Ocean, giving it that name because there he sta- tioned veteran soldiers - for veteran and retired soldiers are called emeriti. 70. Olisipona (i.e. Ulisippo, Lisbon) was founded and named by Ulysses (Ulixes); histori- ans say that in this place the sky is separated from the earth and the seas from the lands. 71. Julius Caesar founded Hispalis (i.e. Seville), which he called Julia Romula from his own and Rome's name. But Seville was nicknamed after its site, because it was placed in
swampy ground on piles (palus; his palis = 'on these piles') driven deep so that it would not succumb to its
slippery and unstable foundation. 72. The town of Gades (i.e. Cadiz) was founded by the Phoenicians, who also founded New Carthage. 73. The city Septe (i.e. Ceuta) is named from its seven (septem) mountains, called The Brothers (Fratres) because of their mutual resemblance, which border on the Strait of Gibraltar (Gaditanus fretus, 'Strait of Cadiz').
74. The founder of Lix and Tingis (i.e. Tangiers) is Antaeus, whom Hercules is said to have beaten in a wrestling match and killed. Lix was named from the Mauretanian river Lixus, where the royal seat of Antaeus was; likewise Sala, because it borders the river Sala. 75. Juba, king of the Moors (Mauri), founded the city of Caesarea in Mauretania in honor of Caesar Augustus, and from his name he gave it the name Caesarea. Just so Herod named the other Caesarea in Palestine, which is now a very famous city. 76. When Hercules was passing that way, twenty of his company separated off and built the city of Icosium in Caesarean Mauritania. Lest any of them should gloat about his own name being imposed on the city, the name of Icosium was given to it, from the number of its founders (cf. ?­moot, "twenty"). 77. Cyrene
was the queen of Libya who founded the city of Cyrene in her own name, and from the city she named the region Cyrenian Libya.
ii. Public buildings (De aedificiis publicis) 1. A city (civitas) is a multitude of people united by a bond of community, named for its 'citizens' (civis), that is, from the residents of the city (urbs) [because it has jurisdiction over and 'contains the lives' (contineat vitas) of many]. Now urbs (also "city") is the name for the actual build- ings, while civitas is not the stones, but the inhabitants.
2. In fact there are three kinds of community (societas): of households, of cities (urbs), and of nations (gens).
3. 'City' (urbs) is from 'circle' (orbis), because ancient cities were made circular, or from 'plow-handle' (urbus), a part of the plow by which the site of the walls would be marked out. Whence this (Vergil, Aen. 3.109 combined with 1.425):
And he chose a seat for his kingdom, and marked out the limits with a furrow.
For the site of the future city was marked out with a furrow, that is, by a plow. Cato says (Origins 1, fr. 18): "One who founds a new city plows with a bull and cow. Where he has plowed, he makes a wall. Where he wants a gateway to be, he lifts and carries (portare) the plow, and he calls it a gateway (porta)." 4. Thus indeed a city would be encircled by a plow, with young oxen of differ- ent genders indicating the mingling of its households, as a sign of sowing and bearing fruit. Further, a city is founded by the plow, and razed by the plow. Whence Horace (Odes 1.16.20):
And draw an enemy plow over the walls.
5. Some have said the word 'town' (oppidum) is from the 'opposing' (oppositio) of its walls; others, from its hoarding of wealth (ops), due to which it is fortified; others, because the community of those living in it gives mutual support (ops) against an enemy. At first people, in effect naked and defenseless, had no protection against monstrous beasts, nor shelters from cold and heat, nor were they sufficiently safe among themselves from other people. 6. At last, with native cunning, having lived in shelters of caves and woods, they fashioned huts and cottages from twigs and thatch, that life might be safer, in that there would be no access for those who could do harm. This is the origin of towns, which are said to
be named towns (oppidum) because they offer protec- tion (ops). A town (oppidum) moreover differs in its size and its walls from a hamlet (vicus) or a fortress (castel- lum) or a 'country village' (pagus). 7. Further, cities (civ- itas) are called 'colonial towns' (colonia), or 'free towns' (municipium), or hamlets, fortresses, or country villages.
8. A city properly so called is one that has been founded not by newcomers but by those native to its soil. There- fore communities (urbs) founded by their own citizens (civis) are named cities (civitas), not colonies. 9. On the other hand, a colony (colonia) is what is filled by new inhabitants (cultor) when there are no indigenous peo- ple. Hence also a 'colony' is so called from the tilling (cultus, ppl. of colere) of a field. 10. A free town is one that, while remaining in the status of a city, obtains from the sovereign some legal right toagreater or lesser obliga- tion. It is called 'free town' (municipium) from 'official functions' (munia), that is 'obligations,' because they yield only these functions, that is, as the owed tributes or services (munus). The most notorious court cases and those involving a person's freedom, as well as those which proceed from the sovereign, are not conducted there; these belong to the jurisdiction of the city (civi- tas).
11. Hamlets and fortresses and country villages are communities that are distinguished by none of the dig- nity of a city, but are inhabited by a common gathering of people, and because of their small size are tributary to the larger cities. 12. A hamlet (vicus) is so called as con- sisting only of its dwellings (cf. vicus, "row of houses"), or becauseitonlyhasstreets(via), andnowalls. It iswithout the protection of walls - although the dwelling-places in a city (urbs) are also called neighborhoods (vicus). It is called a hamlet because it is 'instead of' (vice) a city, or because it has streets (via) only, with no walls. 13. The ancients called a town sited on a very high place a fort (castrum), as if it were a high 'cottage' (casa). The plural of this is 'camp' (castra), and its diminutive is 'fortress' (castellum), [or because within it the freedom of the inhabitants would be 'cut off' (castrare) lest the popu- lace wandering here and there should expose the fort to the enemy.] 14. 'Country villages' (pagus) are places fit- ted out with buildings for those dwelling among fields. These are also called marketplaces (conciliabulum), from the gathering and association of many people in one place. 15. Crossroads (compitum) are places where gath- erings of country people are customarily made, and they
are called crossroads because many regions in the coun- try meet (competere) there, and there country people assemble.
16. The suburbs (suburbanum) are the buildings that surround a city, as if the term were 'below the city' (sub urbe). 17. Ramparts (moenia) are the walls of a city, so called because they protect (munire) the city, as if they were the bulwarks (munimentum) of the city, that is, the guardians. 18. They are also called a defense (munium), as if "made by hand" (manu factum); and thus also the word 'duty' (munus). A 'city wall' (murus, plural muri) is so called from 'defending' (munitio), as if the term were 'to be defended' (muniri, passive infinitive of munire), because it defends and guards the inner parts of the city. Furthermore, ramparts (moenia) have a double mean- ing, for sometimes all the public buildings of a city are loosely called by this word, as (Vergil, Aen. 2.234):
We split the walls and expose the buildings (moenia) of the city.
But properly moenia are walls only.
19.A city wall is furnished with towers and bulwarks. Towers (turris) are so called because they are rounded (teres) and tall - for something tall and circular, like a column, is 'rounded.' Even though they may be con- structed as squared off and wide, they still look round to those observing from far off, because everything appears round whose angular shape disappears and is lost across a long stretch of air. 20. Bulwarks (propugnaculum) are the pinnacles (penna) of city walls, so called because from them the city is 'fought for' (propugnare). 21. A 'fore-wall' (promurale), because it is for (pro) protection of the city wall (murus), for it is a wall in front of the city wall.
22. A gate (porta) is the name of the place where something can be carried in (importare) or carried out (exportare). The word 'gate' is properly used either of a city or of a military camp, as was mentioned above. A 'row of houses' (vicus), as was said above, comprises the dwelling-places of a city; hence neighborhoods (vicinus) are so called. Lanes (via) are the narrow spaces that lie between rows of houses. 23. Boulevards (platea) are the uninterrupted and spacious streets of a city, named for their breadth according to the proper sense of the Greek tongue, for in Greek p2atáç means "broad." 24.A 'side- street' (quintana) is one fifth (quintus) of a boulevard, through which a cart can pass. 25. Sewers (cloaca) are
so called because water is strained (percolare) through them. People say that Tarquinius Priscus first made these in Rome in order that, whenever there was a downpour of rain, water would pass through them out of the city so that the destructive force of water in very great and prolonged storms would not destroy the level places or foundations of the city. 26. Porticos (imbolus) are so named either because they are 'under the mass' (subvol- umen), or because people walk (ambulare) under them, for they are the arcades found here and there along the boulevards.
27. A forum (forus, i.e. the archaic form of forum) is a place for practicing litigation, named from "speak- ing" (fari) [or from King Phoroneus, who first gave law to the Greeks]. These places are also called prorostra (lit. "before the prows") because prows (rostrum) were seized from captured Carthaginian ships in the Punic War and set up in the Roman Forum as a sign of this victory.
28. The Senate House (curia) is so called because there the oversight (cura) of all affairs is administered by the Senate. 29. A praetorium is so named because there a 'judicial magistrate' (praetor) has his seat for managing investigations. 30. A gymnasium (gymnasium) in gen- eral is a place for exercising, but in Athens it was a place where philosophy was discussed and the study of wis- dom was engaged in, for the Greeks call yUµv?otov what is called 'exercise' in Latin, that is, 'meditation' (medita- tio). But gymnasiums are also bathhouses and places for runners and athletes, because there people are trained in the study of their particular skills. 31. The Capitolium of Rome is so called because it was the highest head (caput) of the Roman city and its religion. Others say that when Tarquinius Priscus was uncovering the foundations of the Capitolium in Rome, he found on the site of the foundation the head (caput) of a human marked with Etruscan writing, and hence he named it the Capitolium.
32. Citadels (arx) are the high, fortified parts of a city, for whatever are the safest places in a city are called citadels from their holding off (arcere) the enemy. Also from this term are 'bow' (arcus) and 'strongbox' (arca).
33. The Romans suppose that the Circus (Circus) was
named for the circling (circuitus) of horses, because there horses run around (circum) the turning-posts. 34. A theater (theatrum) is named from 'spectacle' (spec- taculum), from the term 9?Yp(c)a ("spectacle"), because people standing in it and watching (spectare) from above gaze at stage-plays. 35. And an amphitheater (amphithe- atrum) is so called because it is composed of two theaters (cf. ?µ??(c), "on both sides"), for an amphitheater is round, but a theater consists of half an amphitheater, having the shape of a semicircle.
36.A labyrinth (labyrinthus) is a structure with intri- cate walls, of the kind made at Crete by Daedalus where the Minotaur was shut in. If anyone should enter into it without a ball of twine he would not be able to find the way out. This building is so situated that, for those who open its doors, a terrifying thunder is heard within. It slopes down more than a hundred steps. Inside are images and monstrous effigies, innumerable pas- sages heading every which way in the darkness, and other things done to confuse the way of those who have entered, so that it seems impossible to pass from its dark- ness to the light. There are four labyrinths: first the Egyp- tian, second the Cretan, the third in Lemnos, the fourth in Italy. All were so constructed that not even the ages can destroy them.
37. A lighthouse (farum; cf. Greek j?poç) is a very tall tower which the Greeks and Latins in common have named 'lighthouse' from its particular use, because thanks to its signal of flames it may be seen from far off by sailors. Ptolemy is said to have constructed such a lighthouse near Alexandria for eight hundred talents of gold. Its function was to show a light for ships sailing at night, in order to make known the channels and the entrance to the port, so that sailors would not be deceived in the darkness and run onto the rocks - for Alexan- dria has tricky access with deceptive shallows. There- fore from this, people call the devices built for the pur- pose of shining a light in ports 'lighthouses' (pharus), for
???ç means "light"; opoç, "vision" (actually "landmark, pillar"). Hence Lucifer (i.e. the 'Light-bearer') is called jYo??ópoç in Greek.
38. Coclea are tall, round towers, and they are called coclea as if the word were 'cycles' (cyclea), because in them one climbs in a spiraling ring. One of these in Rome is 175 (Roman) feet high. 39. Hot baths (thermae) are so called because they are warm, for the Greeks call heat 9?pµóv.
40. Baths (balneum) are assigned their name from the
idea of the lifting of sorrow, because the Greeks called it ßa2av?±ov (cf. ß?22?tv, "cast away"; ?v(c)a, "grief"), since it takes away one's anxiety of spirit. Gymnasiums (gym- nasium) are so called because there athletes are trained, with their bodies anointed and massaged, for yUµv?otov in Greek means "training" in Latin. 41.A dressing-room (apodyterium), where the clothes of bathers are left, is named for 'disrobing,' for ?po6á?tvin Greekmeans"dis- robe." 42. Propina is a Greek word, which now among us has been corrupted to popina. It is a place next to a public bath where after bathing one may be refreshed of one's hunger and thirst. From this are named both propina and propinare ("to drink a toast"), for p?±va in Greek means "hunger" - because this place relieves hunger.
43. 'Stalls' formerly referred to the small buildings belonging to the common people, humble and simple neighborhood buildings that could be closed by planks and boards. From this also comes the word 'shop girl' (tabernaria), because there she usually would sit. They are called stalls (taberna) because they are constructed of boards (tabula) and planks; even though they no longer look this way now they still retain the original name.
44.A meat-market (macellum) is so called because there livestock is slaughtered and put up for sale to merchants.
45.A market (mercatum) takes its name from commerce (commercium), for there things would be bought and sold. Likewise a custom house (teloneum) is the name of the place where the revenue of ships and the wages of sailors are paid, for there sits the tax collector who will set a price on things and demand it aloud from the merchants. 46. A prison is a place that we are prohib- ited from leaving, and it is called prison (carcer) from 'confining' (coercere). [Hence Fronto (fr. 12): "And they seemed to revel like the Greeks in pleasant places rather than 'to be confined in prison' (coerceri carcere)."]
iii. Dwelling-places (De habitaculis) 1. A habitation (habitatio) is so called from 'having' (habere), as in (Vergil, Ecl. 2.29):
To inhabit (habitare, the frequentative of habere) cottages.
'House' (domus) is named from a Greek term, for the Greeks call a shelter 6?µa. A house is the dwelling of one family, as a city is of one population, as the world is the domicile (domicilium) of the whole human race. 2. The ancients called every edifice (aedificium)a building
(aedes). Some think 'building' (aedes) took its name from 'eating' (edere) something, giving an example from Plau- tus (cf. The Little Carthaginian 529):
If I had called you into the building (aedes) for lunch.
Hence also edifice (aedificium), because it was first 'made for eating' (ad edendum factum). 3. A court (aula) is a royal house, or a spacious dwelling enclosed by four colonnades. 4. An atrium (atrium) is a large building, or a very roomy and spacious house, and it is called an atrium because three (tres, neuter tria) colonnades are added to it on the outside. Others say it is 'atrium' as if blackened (ater, neut. atrum) by fire and a lamp, for the blackening is caused by smoke. 5. A palace (palatium) is named after Pallas, prince of the Arcadians, in whose honor the Arcadians built the town Pallanteum, and they called the royal palace that they founded in his name 'Palatium.'
6. They say the bedroom (thalamus, also "bridal chamber") is so named for this reason: when the Sabine women were abducted by the Romans, one of them, more noble than the others in appearance, was abducted and greatly admired by all, and it was the response of an oracle that she be married to the general Thalamon. Because this marriage had gone happily, it was estab- lished that in every wedding the name thalamus would be repeated. The Egyptians also, in their own tongue, name those places in which newlyweds go down and lie together thalamus. 7. The dining room (coenaculum) is named from the gathering (communio; cf. motvóç, "common"; cena, "dinner") at dinner; hence also the cloister (coenobium) is a gathering (congregatio). Indeed, the ancients used to dine in public and in common, nor was anyone's feast private, lest the delicacies taken in secret should beget luxuriousness. 8. The "formal din- ing room" (triclinium) is the dining room named after the three couches for those reclining there. Thus among the ancients, in the place where the furniture for a din- ner party was arranged, three couches were set up on which those reclining would feast. In Greek m2(c)v? means "bed" or "couch," from which it developed that one would say triclinium. 9. A chamber (cella) is so called because it hides and conceals (celare) us. A sleeping- chamber (cubiculum) is so named because there we lie down (cubare) and rest while sleeping. Likewise a bed (cubile) is a place for sleeping. A privy (secessus) is so
named because it is a private area, that is, 'without access' (sine accessu).
10. An inn (diversorium) is so called because there peo- ple meet who come from diverse (diversus) ways. Hos- pice (hospitium), a Greek word, is wherea person dwells for a time according to the law of hospitality, and passing through, leaves again for elsewhere. Whence also camp- grounds (metatum), because they are moved (mutare). Hence one reads, "They 'laid out' (metari) camp," for "they moved" - for the army does not stay there but passes through. 11. Maenius, the colleague of Crassus, constructed bleachers in the Forum so that there would be places for spectators to stand, and these are called Maeniana ("galleries") after his name. These are also called sun terraces (solarium), because they are exposed to the sun (sol). After these some built galleries of stone for their colonnades, some of wood, and they attached them to their marketplaces and houses. 12.A house for- merly was made of wood, 'boarded' (tabulatus), and from this the name 'floor' (tabulatum) remains. A cellar (hypogeum; cf. úpó, "under"; y?, "earth) is a building constructed under ground, which we call a cavern or cave. A sun terrace (solarium) is so called because it is open to the sun (sol) and breezes (aura), as was the place from which David saw Bathsheba bathing and fell in love (II Kings 11:2 Vulgate).
13. When Antiochus besieged Jerusalem, Hyrcanus, leader of the Jews, took three thousand talents of gold from the tomb of David after it was opened, and gave three hundred of them to Antiochus to lift the siege. To remove the ill will attendant on this deed he is said to have used the rest of the money to establish the first 'stranger's hospice' (xenodochium), which would sup- port the arrival of poor people or pilgrims, whence it took the name - for it is named from the Greek (?v- o6oy?±ov, in Latin, 'support of pilgrims.' Moreover, the place where sick people are collected from the streets is called a vooomoµ?±ov ('hospital'; cf. vóooç, "sickness") in Greek. There the limbs of wretched people, consumed with weariness and fasting, are given care.
iv. Sacred buildings (De aedificiis sacris) 1. Sanctuar- ies (sacrum) are places established for divine worship, namely those in which altars are consecrated (conse- crare) for high priests making sacrifices according to
their custom. 2. Sanctums (sanctum) according to the ancients are the outer precincts of temples. The 'Holy of Holies' (sanctum sanctorum) is the inner part of the temple to which no one had access, excepting only the priest. It is called the Holy of Holies because it is holier than the outer oracle, or because it is holier in com- parison with the sanctum, just as we speak of the Song of Songs, because it excels all songs. A sanctum is so called from the blood (sanguis) of sacrificial victims, for among the ancients nothing was called holy (sanctus) except what had been consecrated and sprinkled with the blood of a sacrifice. Again sanctum, what is known to have been sanctified (sancire, ppl. sancitum). More- over to sanction (sancire) is to confirm, and to defend from wrong by imposing punishment. Thus both laws and city walls are said to be holy (sanctus). 3. A place of propitiation (propitiatorium) [is as it were a 'place of prayers of propitiation' (oratorium propitiationis), for a propitiation is an appeasing.] Oracles (oraculum) are so called because from there responses are given, and oracles are from the 'mouth' (os, gen. oris). 4. Pene- tralia are the secret places of oracles, and are called pene- tralia because they are 'interior' (penitus), that is, 'almost inside' (pene intus). An oratorium is dedicated to prayer (oratio) only, and no one should do anything in it except that for which it was made and from which it receives its name.
5. A monastery (monasterium) is the dwelling of one monk (monachus), for µóvoç is Greek for 'alone' (solus), ot?ptov for 'station' - it is the dwelling of a solitary (solitarius). 6. 'Convent' (coenobium) seems to be a com- pound of Greek and Latin. It is the habitation of a num- ber of people living in common, for motvóç in Greek means "common." 7. The term 'temple' (templum) is general, for the ancients would give the name 'temples' to all sorts of large places, and temples (templa) were so named as if they were called 'spacious shelters' (tecta ampla). But a place oriented to the east was also called a temple, from the idea of 'observing for augury' (con- templatio). A temple had four parts: the front facing to the east, the rear to the west, the left to the north, the right to the south. Hence when they would build a tem- ple they would face toward the equinoctial sunrise, so that lines laid from the east to the west would divide the sky into equal parts on the right and the left, and thus whoever would take counsel or pray would look directly east. 8. Shrines (fanum) are named after fauns (faunus),
for whom pagan error built temples where those making consultations would hear the responses of demons.
9. The ancients called temples with fountains, where people would be washed before entering, 'spring- shrines' (delubrum), and these shrines were thus named after 'washing' (diluere). These are now buildings with holy (i.e. baptismal) fonts, in which the faithful are puri- fied as reborn, and they are well termed spring-shrines by a certain foretelling, because they are for the 'washing away' (ablutio) of sins. 10. For the font (fons) in spring- shrines is the place of the reborn, in which seven steps are made in the mystery of the Holy Spirit; there are three going down and three coming up: the seventh is the fourth step (i.e. the bottom of the waist-deep baptismal font), and that is like the Son of Man, the extinguisher of the furnace of fire, the sure place for the feet, the founda- tion of the water, in which the fullness of divinity dwells bodily. 11. The dwellings of kings were called 'basilicas' (basilica) at first, whence they take their name, for the term ßaot2?áç means "king", and basilicas, "royal habi- tations." But now 'basilica' is the name for divine temples because there worship and sacrifices are offered to God, the king of all. 12. A martyrium is a place of martyrs (martyr), derived from Greek, because each is built in memory of a martyr, or because the tombs of the saints there are those of martyrs.
13. Some have said that an altar (ara) is so called because there the kindled sacrifices burn (ardere). Oth- ers say it is from a 'prayer,' which the Greeks call ?p?, whence contrariwise a curse is called mat?pa. Others would derive it from altitudo ("height"), but wrongly.
14. However, altare (i.e. another term for 'altar') rightly is named from altitudo, as if the word were 'a high altar' (alta ara). 15. The ambo (pulpitum) is so called because the reader or psalmist stationed in it can be seen by the people (populus) in public (publicum), so that he may be heard more easily. 16. 'Tribunal' (tribunal), because from there rulings about one's manner of life are bestowed (tribuere) by a priest. It is a place set up on high, from which everyone can hear. In another view 'tribunal' takes its name from 'tribe' (tribus), because the tribe is called together before it. 17. The pulpit (analogium) is so called because the sermon is preached from there, for 2óyoç in Greek means "sermon" - and it also is located in a rather high place [in order that the reader or psalmist thus stationed can be seen in public by the people, where he may be heard more easily].
v. 
Repositories (De repositoriis) 1. The sacrarium is properly the place in a temple where holy things (sacrum) are put away; similarly the 'temple treasure- chamber' (donarium), where offerings are gathered; similarly the 'rows of seating' (lectisternium) where peo- ple are accustomed to sit. Hence the sacrarium is named from the taking of sacred things in and out. 2. However, the donarium is so named because the gifts (donum) that they customarily offer in temples are put away there. 3. The treasury (aerarium) is so called because formerly minted bronze (aes, gen. aeris) was hidden away there. It was in use in former times when gold and silver were not yet minted; although money was afterwards made from gold and silver, the name aerarium still remained, after the bronze from which money took its first name.
4. A cabinet (armarium) is a place where the tools or records of any sort of craft (ars) are placed. But an armory (armamentarium) is where only weaponry is placed. Whence Juvenal (Satires 13.83):
Whatever weapons the armories of heaven hold.
Both of them are so called from 'shoulders' (armus), that is, 'arms,' with which weapons are wielded. 5. A library (bibliotheca) is a place where books are deposited, for ß(c)ß2oç in Greek means "book," 9?m?, "repository."
6. A 'storeroom' (promptuarium) is so called because from there foodstuffs are brought out (promere), that is, carried forth. 7. A pantry (cellarium), so called because in it are gathered (colligere) the dining implements, or whatever foodstuffs are left over. There is this differ- ence between a storeroom and a pantry, that a pantry serves for a few days, but a storeroom for a long time. 8. However, storehouses (apotheca) or granaries (horreum) can be called repositories (repostorium) or 'hoarding places' (reconditorium) by literal translation (cf. ?pó, "back again"; 9?m?), because in them people deposit (reponere, ppl. repositus) harvested crops. Hence we call an ample supply of stored goods by the Greek word 'hoard' (entheca).
vi. Workplaces (De operariis) 1. A workshop (ergas- terium) is where any work is done, from the Greek words spya, "works," and ot?ptov, "station" - that is, work-station (operarii statio). 2. 'Penitentiary work- houses' (ergastulum) are also named from the same Greek word; there offenders are assigned to do some kind of work, of the kind that gladiators would
usually be assigned, and banished people, who cut mar- ble but are still bound in custody by chains. 3. The 'women's quarters' (gynaeceum) is so named from the Greek because there a gathering of women would meet to carry out the task of wool-working, for a 'woman' in Greek is called yUv?. 4. The term 'millhouse' (pistrinum) is as if the word were pilistrinum, because formerly grain was pounded by a pestle (pilum). Whence among the ancients the term was not 'millers' (molitor) but 'pounders' (pistor), as if it were pinsores, from their crushing (pinsere) the kernels of grain - for they did not yet use millstones (mola), but would crush grain with a pestle. Whence Vergil (Geo. 1.267):
Now parch the grain with the fire, now grind it with a stone.
5. A furnace (clibanus) [is so called from 'slope' (clivus), because it narrows as it goes up, for we say an upward or winding path is a slope.] 6. An oven (fur- nus) is a term derived from 'spelt' (far), because bread made from spelt is baked there. 7.A press (torcular) is so called because there grapes are trod and, once they have been squeezed (extorquere), are pressed out. 8. A forus (i.e. forum) is a place where grapes are trod, so called because the grapes are brought (ferre) there - or because there they are smashed (ferire) with feet; hence it is also called a wine-press (calcatorium, "treading-place"; cf. calx, 'heel'). But this term forum means many things: the first kind of forum is the place in a city set aside for market trading; second, where a magistrate will give judgments; third, the one we spoke of above, which we have called the wine-press; fourth, the decks of ships, of which Vergil (Aen. 6.412):
And he clears the decks (forus).
A vat (lacus) is so called because the juice (liquor) of fruit runs down into it.
vii. Entranceways (De aditibus) 1. An entranceway (aditus) is so called from 'going' (ire, ppl. itus); through it we pass and are admitted. 2.A vestibule (vestibulum) is either the entranceway of a private house or a space adja- cent to public buildings. It is called a 'vestibule' because the entrance doors are covered (vestire) by it, or because it covers an entranceway with a roof, or from 'standing- place' (stare). 3. A portico (porticus), because it is a pas- sageway rather than a place where one remains standing, as if it were a gateway (porta). Also porticus because it is
uncovered (apertus). 4. A 'front door' (ianua) is named after a certain Janus, to whom the pagans dedicate any entrance or exit. Whence Lucan (Civil War 1.62):
Let her (Peace) shut the iron doors of war-making Janus.
Now this is the first entrance of a house; others, inside the front door, are generally called doorways. A door- way (ostium) is that by which we are prevented from any entrance, so called from 'impeding' (ostare, i.e. obstare) [or it is doorway (ostium) because it discloses (osten- dere) something within]. Others say doorway is so called because it detains an enemy (ostis, i.e. hostis), for there we set ourselves against our adversaries - hence also the name of the town Ostia at the mouth of the Tiber, because it is set there to oppose the enemy (cf. i.56 above). 'Door panels' (foris) or leaves (valva) are also elements of a door, but the former are so called because they swing out (foras), the latter swing (revolvere) inward, and they can be folded double - but usage has generally corrupted those terms. 5. Barriers (claustrum) are so called because
they are closed (claudere). 6. Windows (fenestra) have a narrow exterior and awidened interior, of the kind we see in barns. They are so called because they lend (fenerari, i.e. faenerari) light - for light in Greek is called ???ç - or because a person inside sees (videre) out through them. Others suppose that window is so called because it provides (minestrare, i.e. ministrare) light, with the name a blending of a Greek and a Latin word, for light in Greek is ???ç (i.e. ???ç + minestrare).
7. A hinge (cardo) is the place on which a door swings and is always moved. It is so called after the term map6(c)a ("heart"), because as the heart (cor) governs and moves the whole person, so this pivot governs and moves a door. Whence the proverbial expression, for a matter to be "at a turning point" (in cardine). 8. A threshold (limen) of a door is so called because it is set crosswise like a field's boundary-line (limes), and one enters and leaves across it as one enters and leaves a field. 9. Door- posts (postis) and pilasters (antae) are so called as if the words were post and ante. Antae because they stand 'in front' (ante), or because we approach them 'beforehand' (antea), before we enter a house; postes because they stand 'behind' (post) the door.
viii. The parts of buildings (De partibus aedificiorum)
1. A foundation (fundamentum) is so called because it is the bottom (fundus) of a house. Likewise it is called
quarry-stone (caementum), after 'hewing' (caedere), because it arises from the hewing of thick stone. 2. A wall (paries) is so called because there are always two of 'equal size' (par, plural pares), either from side to side or from front to back. Whether the building is four-sided or six-sided, the facing walls will be of equal size; otherwise the construction is deformed.
3. We speak of ruins (parietinae), as if the word were 'the ruins of walls' (parietum ruina); these are walls standing without roofs or inhabitants. 4. The 'corner' (angulus), because it joins two walls into one (in unum coniungeret). Roofs (culmen) are so called because the ancients covered their roofing with straw (culmus), as country people still do. Hence the peak of a roof is called the 'ridge' (culmen).
5. Vaults (camera) are bending structures facing to the inside, so named from 'curved,' for maµoUp (other- wise unattested) is "curve" in Greek. 6. 'Paneled ceilings' (laquearium) are what cover and decorate vaults, and they are also called lacunaria. The primary term is 'panel' (lacus), as in Lucilius (Satires, fr. 1290):
The building and the panels (lacus) resound.
The diminutive of this produces lacunar, as Horace (Odes 2.18.1):
Nor does a gilded lacunar glitter in my house.
Likewise the other diminutive lacunarium is made, and by ?vt(c)ottyov (i.e. antistoechum, substitution of a letter) it produces the term laquearium. 7.A 'vaulted chamber' (absida) is from a Greek word (cf. ?y(c)ç, gen. ?y±6oç, "arch, vault") that means "full of light" in Latin, because it is resplendent with the light received through an arch. But whether we ought to call it absida or absis is doubtful, because certain experts consider the declension of this word ambiguous. 8. A 'tortoise-shell vault' (testudo, lit. 'tortoise shell') is a transverse vault of a temple, for the ancients would make the roofs of their temples in the shape of a tortoise shell. These would be made thus to duplicate the image of the sky, which is evidently convex. Others take the tortoise-shell vault to mean a place on the side of an atrium facing the people coming in (i.e. the narthex). 9. An arch (arcus) is so called because it is curved with a narrowed (artus) tip. These are also 'archways' (fornix).
10. Pavements (pavimentum) that are worked out with the skill of a picture have a Greek origin; mosaics
(lithostratum) are made from little pieces of shell and tiles colored in various hues. They are called pavements because they are 'rammed down' (pavire), that is, beaten. From this also comes the word 'dread' (pavor), which strikes the heart. 11. An ostracus is a tiled pavement, because it consists of broken-up pots mixed with lime, for Greeks call pots ootpa. 12. The area called a compluvium (cf. pluvia, "rain") is so named because water gathers (convenire) in it from the surrounding areas. Tiles (tessella) are what domiciles are paved with, named as the diminutive from 'paving stones' (tessera), that is, 'square little stones.'
13. Pedestals (basis) are the supports of columns, which rise up from this foundation and sustain the weight of the material placed above. Further, bases is the name of a very strong stone in the Syrian language.
14. Columns (columna) are named according to their length and roundness (see XIX.xxix.2); the weight of the whole structure is carried by them. The ancient ratioheld that their thickness was a third of their height. There are four kinds of round columns: Doric, Ionic, Tuscan, and Corinthian, differing among themselves in the ratio of thickness to height. A fifth kind is that called Attic, with four angles or more, and sides of equal width. 15. Capi- tals (capitolium, i.e. capitulum) are so called because they are the heads (caput, gen. capitis) of columns (columna), just as there is a head on a neck (collum). Architraves (epistolium, i.e. epistylium) are the beams placed above the capitals of columns, and the word is Greek, [that is, 'placed above.']
Roof-tiles (tegulae), because they cover (tegere) buildings; and 'curved roof-tiles' (imbrex), because they fend off the rain (imber). 16. Bricks (later) and tiles (lat- erculus), because they are made in a wide (latus) mold by means of four wooden forms placed around their sides. A conduit (canalis) is so called because it is hollowed out likea reed (canna). We usually cite canalis as having feminine rather than masculine gender. 17. Water pipes (fistula) are so called because they pour (fundere, ppl. fusus) and 'send' water, for oto2a in Greek means "to send" (cf. ots22?tv, "equip, bring"). They are shaped according to the quantity of water and the measure of their capacity.
ix. Fortifications (De munitionibus) 1. A munitum or munimentum ("fortification") is so called because it is made by hand (manus). A 'military enclosure' (cohors) is
so called either because it 'presses together' (coartare) all that is within it, that is, it encloses, or because it restrains (coercere) those outside by creating an obstacle and pre- vents them from approaching. 2. A rampart (vallum) is what is raised up with a mass of earth so that protec- tion may be afforded. It is called rampart from 'palisades' (vallus), for palisades are the stakes with which a rampart is protected. And palisades are so named because they are driven in and 'pulled out' (vellere). The intervallum is the space between the tops of the ramparts, that is, the tops of the posts with which the rampart is furnished - hence other things are also called 'spaces' (spatium), the term evidently derived from 'posts' (stipes, gen. stipitis).
3. A mound (agger) is a heap of any sort of material, with which the trenches and palisades can be reinforced. A mound properly means heaped-up (aggerare) earth that is placed nearby after the rampart is constructed, but loosely speaking we call the walls and all the fortifi- cations the mound.
4. Fences (maceria) are the long walls with which some vineyards are enclosed, for the Greeks say µampóv for 'long.' 5. In Africa and Spain walls of earth are called for- matum or formaceum (lit. "molded") because they are pressed into a form (forma) made from planks enclos- ing them on both sides rather than built up from the ground. They last for ages, undamaged by wind and fire, and stronger than any concrete. 6. Hedges (sepes) are protective barriers for what has been planted (satus), whence they take their name. Sheepfolds (caulae) are sheep's pens or the hedges (saepimentum) of sheep- folds. Moreover, with [the letter] c removed, it is a Greek term, for the Greeks call holding-pens for animals aù2a(c).
x. Tents (De tentoriis) 1. A tabernaculum is a soldier's tent, with which they avoid the heat of the sun, the onslaughts of rainstorms, and the injury of cold while on the march. They are called tabernacula because their sides are stretched out and suspended by ropes from the boards (tabula) standing between them which hold up the tents. 2. A tent (tentorium) is so called because it is stretched (tendere, ppl. tentus) with ropes and stakes; hence today people are said to 'stretch the truth' (prae- tendere). 3. Pavilions (papilio, lit. "butterfly, moth") are
so called from their resemblance to the little flying animals that teem especially when the mallows are flow- ering. These are the little winged creatures that gather to a kindled light and, flitting around it, are forced to die from being too close to the fire.
xi. Sepulchers (De sepulchris) 1. A sepulcher (sepul- chrum) is so called from 'buried' (sepelire, ppl. sepultus). Originally people were buried in their own homes. Later this was prohibited by law, so that the bodies of the liv- ing would not be infected by contact with the stench. A monument (monumentum) is so named because it 'admonishes the mind' (mentem monere) to remember the deceased person. Indeed, when you don't see a mon- ument, it is as what is written (Psalm 30:13 Vulgate): "I have slipped from the heart as one who is dead." But when you see it, it admonishes the mind and brings you back to mindfulness so that you remember the dead per- son. Thus both 'monument' and 'memory' (memoria) are so called from 'the admonition of the mind' (mentis admonitio). 2.A 'burial mound' (tumulus) is so named as if it were 'swelling ground' (tumens tellus). 'Sarcophagus' (sarcophagus) is a Greek term, because bodies are con- sumed there, for o?p( in Greek means "flesh," ??ay?±v, "to eat."
3. Mausoleums (mausoleum) are the sepulchers or monuments of kings, named after Mausolus, king of the Egyptians. When he was dead his wife built for him a sepulcher of wondrous size and beauty, so that even today any precious monument is called a mausoleum after his name. 4. Pyramids (pyramis) are a type of sep- ulcher that are square and raised to a point beyond any height that can be constructed by hand, whence also, having surpassed the measure of shadows, they are said to have no shadow. They rise with such a construction that they begin wide and finish narrow, like a flame - for pup means "flame." Egypt is the site of these pyra- mids. Among the ancients, powerful people would be buried either under mountains or within mountains; hence it was determined that either pyramids would be constructed above their corpses or huge columns would be erected.
xii. Rural buildings (De aedificiis rusticis) 1.A cottage (casa) is a rustic little dwelling of wattles and woven with reeds and twigs, in which people can be protected from [the force] of cold or the injury of heat. 2. A shed
(tugurium) is a little house that vineyard-keepers make for themselves as a covering (tegimen), as if the word were tegurium, either for avoiding the heat of the sun and deflecting its rays, or so that from there the keeper may drive away either the people or the animals that would lie in wait for the immature fruit. Country people call this a 'hut' (capanna), because it 'holds one' (capiat unum) person only. 3. Some think a tescuum (i.e. tesquum) is a tugurium; others think it is rugged and harsh terrain. 4.A magalium is an elongated structure, made by Numidian peasants, covered with sides that curve in like the hulls of ships, or round in the shape of ovens. They are called magalia as if magaria, because Phoenicians call a new farm a magar - with one letter changed, l for r, magalia from magaria.
xiii. Fields (De agris) 1. Field (ager) in Latin is said to get its name because in it something 'is done' (agere). Others believe that 'field' is more obviously named from the Greek, whence a farm in Greek is called a coragros. 
2. A farm (villa) is named from 'rampart' (vallum), that is the heap of earth that they use to establish the boundary-lines. 3. 'Holdings' (possessio) are vast public and private fields that originally someone occupied and owned (possidere) not by property transfer but insofar as he 'had power' (posse)- whence also they are named.
4. An 'estate' (fundus) is so called because the family's patrimony is founded (fundare) and established on it. Further, an estate should be taken as both one's urban and rural property. 5. A 'manor' (praedium) is so called because, of all the possessions of the head of the family, it is the most 'seen before' (praevidere), that is, it is most visible, as if the word were praevidium - or because the ancients referred to the fields which they had seized in war as 'booty' (praeda).
6. Now every field, as Varro teaches us, falls into one of four types. There is the arable (arvus) field, that is, for sowing; or the plantable (consitus), that is, suitable for trees; or pasture (pascuus), set apart for grass and herds only; or the floral (florus), because these are garden spots fit for bees and flowers. Vergil followed this division in the four books of his Georgics. 7. The ancients called uncultivated fields - that is, forests and pasturelands - 'open country' (rus), but the part that was cultivated, the 'field' (ager). The open country is where honey, milk, and cattle can be obtained, and from it the 'country person' (rusticus) is named. These things make up the supreme
toil-free happiness of peasants. 8.A 'field of grain' (seges) is where grain is sown, whence Vergil (Geo. 1.47):
That field of grain (seges) only then answers the prayers of the eager farmer.
9.A field is called 'common pasture' (compascuus) when it is left out of the division of the fields in order to 'pro- vide pasturage in common' (pascere communiter) among neighbors. 10. An alluvial (alluvius) field is that which a watercourse (fluvius) gradually turns into a field. 11. A field is called 'naturally enclosed' (arcifinius) when it is not bounded by fixed measures of boundary-lines, but its 'boundaries are enclosed' (arcentur fines) by a barrier of rivers, mountains, or trees - wherefore also no leftover patches of land interrupt these fields.
12. A fallow (novalis) field is one plowed for the first time, or one that in alternate years is left empty in order to renew (novare) its strength, for fallow lands some- times willbe fruitful and sometimes empty. 13.A desolate (squalidus) field is as it were 'ex-cultivated' (excolidus), because now it has passed out of cultivation, just as the term exconsul comes from one's having departed from the consulate. 14. A marshy (uliginosus) field is always wet (uvidus), whereas a field that sometimes dries up is called moist (humidus). Swampiness (uligo) is a natu- ral liquid quality of earth, never leaving it. 15. 'Remain- ders' (subseciva) are, properly speaking, what a tailor cuts off from the material and throws away as superflu- ous. Hence 'remainders of land' (subsiciva) are plots that, because they are sterile or swampy, people reject when the fields are divided into parcels. Further, 'remainders' are those areas that in the division of a field do not make up a hundred-measure, that is, two hundred jugers. 16. A 'threshing floor' (area) is named for the levelness of its floor, and it is called area because of its flatness and evenness - hence also altar (ara). Others say a thresh- ing floor is so called because it is smoothed off (eradere) for threshing grain, or because only what is dry (arida) is threshed on it. 17. A meadow (pratum) is where herds are kept because of the abundance of its hay. The ancient Romans gave it this name because it was 'immediately
ready' (protinus paratus) and did not need the great labor of tilling. Meadows are what can be mown. 18. Swamps (palus) are named for the pastoral goddess Pales because they furnish straw (palea), that is, fodder, for beasts of burden.
xiv. The boundaries of fields (De finibus agrorum)
1. Boundaries (finis) are so called because fields are divided by cords (funiculus), for lines of measuring are stretched out when land is partitioned in order to maintain uniformity of dimension. 2. 'Limits' (limes) are named after the old word for 'crosswise,' because the ancients referred to anything crosswise as limus. From this term are derived both the 'thresholds' (limen) of entryways, across which one goes in or out, and 'boundary-limits' (limes), because one goes across these intothe fields. Hencealsowegettheword limus, an apron with slantwise purple trim that public slaves would wear.
3. 'Boundary-lines' (terminus) are the name for what mark out and display the measurement of the land, for through these proof (testimonium) of boundaries is rec- ognized, and lawsuits and squabbles about fields are thus avoided.
4. The largest boundary dimensions of fields are two: the cardo and the decumanus. The cardo, the north-south dimension, is named from the 'hinge' (cardo), the pole of the heavens, for surely the heavens rotate about the North Pole. The decumanus is the crosswise dimension, drawn from east to west, and because it makes the shape of an X, it is called decumanus - a field twice divided in this way makes the figure X of the number ten (decem).
5. An arca (i.e. a quadrangular landmark) is so named from the term 'ward off' (arcere), for it guards the bound- aries of a field and prohibits anyone from approaching. A trifinium, (i.e. a 'place where three boundaries meet') is so called because it delimits the 'boundaries of three' (trium fines) holdings. Likewise quadrifinium, because it bounds four (quattuor). The other boundary dimen- sions are shorter and stand at unequal intervals apart from one another, and have their appointed names.
xv. The measures of fields (De mensuris agrorum)
1. A measure (mensura) is whatever is delimited by weight, capacity, length, height, breadth, and spirit. Thus our ancestors divided the earth into parts, parts into provinces, provinces into regions, regions into locales, locales into territories, territories into fields,
fields into hundred-measures, hundred-measures into jugers, jugers into lots sixty feet square, and then these lots into furrow-measures, Roman rods, paces, steps, cubits, feet, palms, inches, and fingers. So great was their ingenuity. 2. The finger is the least part of field measur- ing. An inch has three fingers, a palm has four fingers, a foot sixteen, a pace five feet, and a Roman rod two paces - that is, ten feet. 3. A 'Roman rod' (pertica) is so called from 'carrying' (portare), as if it were portica. Now all the foregoing measures are based on the body, as palm, foot, pace, and the rest; only the rod is something carried. It is ten feet long and is the equivalent of the measuring- rod (calamus) that measures the Temple in the Book of Ezechiel (40:3).
4. The furrow-measure (actus) is the smallest mea- sure of area, four feet wide and 120 long. Climata have sixty feet on a side, so: (a figure follows). A 'square furrow-measure' (actus quadratus) is bounded on each side by 120 feet, so: (a figure follows). The Baeticans call this measure a 'half-juger' (arapennis), from the term 'plowing' (arare). 5. This square furrow-measure dou- bled makes a juger (iugerum); because it thus consists of a 'joining' (iunctum) it takes the name 'juger.' Now a juger has a length of 240 feet and a breadth of 120, so: (a figure follows). The country people of the province of Baetica call a square furrow-measure an acnua. 6. Like- wise the Baeticans define a porca as an area thirty feet wide and eighty feet long. (A figure follows.) But a balk (porca) is the raised ridge in plowing, and what is dug out is the furrow (lira).
The Gauls call a lot of one hundred (centum) feet square in urban areas a candetum, as if the word were centetum. But in the country they call a proper candetum an area of 150 feet square. Now a field containing a stade (stadialis) is 125 paces, that is, 625 feet long. Computing its measure times eight makes a Roman mile (miliar- ium), which consists of five thousand feet. 7. Further, a hundred-measure (centuria) is a field of two hundred jugers. Among the ancients it took its name from 'a hun- dred (centum) jugers,' but afterwards it was doubled but retained its original name. Although hundred-measures were enlarged in measure, they were not able to change the name.
xvi. Roads (De itineribus) 1. We call our road mea- sures 'miles' (miliarum), the Greeks 'stades' (stadium), the Gauls 'leagues' (leuga), the Egyptians schoeni, the
Persians 'parasangs' (parasanga). Each has its own dis- tance. 2. A mile is completed in a thousand paces, and is called "mile" (milliarium) as if it were 'a thousand- length' (mille-adium) having five thousand feet. 3. A league runs 1,500 paces. A stade is an eighth of a mile, taking 125 paces. They say Hercules first established the stade, and fixed it as that distance that he himself could complete in one breath, and accordingly named it 'stade' (stadium) because at its end he caught his breath and at the same time 'stood still' (stare). 4. A road (via) is the place where a vehicle can go, and it is named road from the vehicles (vehiculum) riding on it. It holds two lanes (actus), to allow for the meeting of vehicles going and coming. 5. Further, every road is either public or private. A public road is one that is on public ground, where a pathway, a lane, is accessible to the people. This pertains either to the sea or to towns. A private road is one that has been given to the neighboring municipality.
6.A street (strata) is so called as if 'worn away' (terere, ppl. tritus) by the feet of the crowd. Lucretius (On the Nature of Things 1.315):
And the street now worn away by the feet of the crowd.
And it is paved, that is 'strewn'(sternere, ppl. stratus) with stones. The Phoenicians are said to be first to have paved roads with stones; afterwards the Romans spread them through almost the whole world, to make travel direct and to keep the common people from being idle. 7. The crown (agger) is the raised middle part of a street paved with stones heaped together (coaggerare), and named from 'mound' (agger), that is, a 'heaping together' (coac- ervatio). Historians call this a military highway (via mil- itaris), as (Vergil, Aen. 5.273):
Just as often a snake, when caught on the crown of the road (agger viae).
8. 
A 'passageway' (iter or itus) is a road on which peo- ple can go (ire, ppl. itus) in any direction. Now iter and itiner mean different things. An iter is a place easy for 'passing along' (trans-itus), whence we also name it itus. But an itiner is the passage (itus) of a long road, as well as the effort of walking to reach where you wish to go.
9. A path (semita) is half a passage (iter), so called from 'half-road' (semi-itus). A path is for humans, but a track is for wild beasts and cattle. 10.A track (callis) is a narrow and beaten passageway for cattle among the mountains, named from calluses (callum) on the feet, or because it is hardened by the hooves (callum) of cattle. Cross- ways (trames) are passageways cutting across (transver- sus) fields, or a straight road so named because it 'passes across' (transmittere). 11. Forks (divortium) are turnings of roads, that is, roads extending in diverse (diversus) directions. Likewise there are side-paths (diverticulum), that is, diverging (diversus) and dividing (divisae) roads, or crossing paths that lead from the side of the main road.
12. A 'junction' (bivium) is so named because two roads meet there. A 'crossroads' (competum) is so called because several roads meet (competere) there, for exam- ple a three-way (trivia) and a four-way (quadrivia) junc- tion. A sidewalk (ambitus) is a two-and-a-half-foot space between the buildings of neighbors, left as an easement for the purpose of walking around the building, and so called from 'walking' (ambulare). 13.A 'rut' (orbita) is the track of a cart, named for the circle (orbis) of its wheel. Likewise a 'cart-way' (actus) is where cattle are usually driven (agere, ppl. actus). A 'mountain path' (clivosum) is a winding road. 'Footprints' (vestigium) are the traces of the feet imprinted by the soles of those who went first, so called because by means of them the paths of those who have gone before are traced (investigare), that is, recognized.
