i. Discipline and art (De disciplina et arte) 1. A disci- pline (disciplina) takes its name from 'learning' (discere), whence it can also be called 'knowledge' (scientia). Now 'know' (scire) is named from 'learn' (discere), because none of us knows unless we have learned. A discipline is so named in another way, because 'the full thing is learned' (discitur plena). 2. And an art (ars, gen. artis) is so called because it consists of strict (artus) precepts and rules. Others say this word is derived by the Greeks from the word ?p?t?, that is, 'virtue,' as they termed knowledge. 3. Plato and Aristotle would speak of this distinction between an art and a discipline: an art con- sists of matters that can turn out in different ways, while a discipline is concerned with things that have only one possible outcome. Thus, when something is expounded with true arguments, it will be a discipline; when some- thing merely resembling the truth and based on opinion is treated, it will have the name of an art.
ii. The seven liberal disciplines (De septem liberalibus disciplinis) 1. There are seven disciplines of the liberal arts. The first is grammar, that is, skill in speaking. The second is rhetoric, which, on account of the brilliance and fluency of its eloquence, is considered most neces- sary in public proceedings. The third is dialectic, other- wise known as logic, which separates the true from the false by very subtle argumentation. 2. The fourth is arith- metic, which contains the principles and classifications of numbers. The fifth is music, which consists of poems and songs. 3. The sixth is geometry, which encompasses the measures and dimensions of the earth. The seventh is astronomy, which covers the law of the stars.
iii. The common letters of the alphabet (De litteris communibus) 1. The common letters of the alphabet are the primary elements of the art of grammar, and are used by scribes and accountants. The teaching of these letters is, as it were, the infancy of grammar, whence Varro also calls this discipline 'literacy' (litteratio). Indeed, let- ters are tokens of things, the signs of words, and they
have so much force that the utterances of those who are absent speak to us without a voice, [for they present words through the eyes, not through the ears]. 2. The use of letters was invented for the sake of remember- ing things, which are bound by letters lest they slip away into oblivion. With so great a variety of information, not everything could be learned by hearing, nor retained in the memory. 3. Letters (littera) are so called as if the term were legitera, because they provide a road (iter) for those who are reading (legere), or because they are repeated (iterare) in reading.
4. The Latin and Greek letters seem to be derived from the Hebrew, for among the Hebrews the first letter is called 'aleph,' and then 'alpha' was derived from it by the Greeks due to its similar pronunciation, whence A among Latin speakers. A transliterator fashioned the letter of one language from the similar sound of another language (i.e. derived the names and shapes of letters of similar sound from the "earlier" language); hence we can know that the Hebrew language is the mother of all languages and letters. But the Hebrews use twenty-two characters, following the twenty-two books of the Old Testament; the Greeks use twenty-four. Latin speakers, falling between these two languages, have twenty-three characters. 5. The letters of the Hebrews started with the Law transmitted by Moses. Those of the Syrians and Chaldeans began with Abraham, so that they agree in the number of characters and in their sounds with the Hebrew letters and differ only in their shapes. Queen Isis, daughter of Inachus, devised the Egyptian letters when she came from Greece into Egypt, and passed them on to the Egyptians. Among the Egyptians, however, the priests used some letters and the common people used others. The priestly letters are known as ¬?póç (sacred), the common letters, p?v6?µoç (common).
The Phoenicians first discovered the use of Greek let- ters, whence Lucan (Civil War 3.220):
If the report is trustworthy, the Phoenicians were the first to dare to indicate by rudimentary shapes a sound meant to endure.
6. Hence it is that the chapter headings of books are written with Phoenician scarlet, since it is from the Phoenicians that the letters had their origin. Cadmus, son of Agenor, first brought seventeen Greek letters from Phoenicia into Greece: A, B, T, A, E, Z, I, K, ?, M, N, O, W, P, C, T, ?. Palamedes added three more to these at the time of the Trojan War: H, x, W. After him the lyricist Simonides added three others: y, ?, T.
7. Pythagoras of Samos first formed the letter T as a
symbol of human life. Its lower stem signifies the first stage of life, an uncertain age indeed, which has not yet given itself to vices or to virtues. The branching into two, which is above, begins with adolescence: the right part of it is arduous, but leads toward a blessed life; the left is easier, but leads to death and destruction. Concerning this Persius (Satires 3.56) speaks thus:
And where the letter has spread out into Samian branches it has shown you the way that rises by means of the right-hand path.
8. There are also five mystical letters among the Greeks. The first is T, which signifies human life, con- cerning which we have just spoken. The second is T, which [signifies] death, for the judges used to put this same letter down against the names of those whom they were sentencing to execution. And it is named 'theta' after the term 9?vatoç, that is, 'death.' Whence also it has a spear through the middle, that is, a sign of death. Concerning this a certain verse says:
How very unlucky before all others, the letter theta.
9. The third, T, shows the figure of the cross of the Lord, whence it is also interpreted as a symbol in Hebrew. Concerning this letter, itwassaidtoanangelin Ezekiel(9: 4): "Go through the midst of Jerusalem, and mark a thau upon the foreheads of the men that sigh, and mourn." The remaining two mystical letters, the first and the last, Christ claims for himself; himself the beginning, himself the end, he says (Apocalypse 22:13): "I am Alpha and Omega," for by moving towards each other in turn, A rolls on all the way to W, and W bends back to A, so that the Lord might show in himself both the movement of the beginning to the end, and the movement of the end to the beginning.
10. All the letters in Greek compose words and also make numbers, for they use the letter alpha as the num- ber 'one.' And when they write beta, they mean 'two';
when they write gamma, they mean 'three' in their numbers; when they write delta, they mean 'four' in their numbers - and so every letter corresponds to a number for the Greeks. 11. Latin speakers, however, do not assign numbers to the letters, but only use them to form words, with the exception of the letters I, and X, which both signifies the cross by its shape, and stands for the number ten. 
iv. The Latin letters (De litteris latinis) 1. The nymph Carmentis first brought the Latin letters to the Ital- ians. She is called Carmentis because she would sing in songs (carmen) of things to come, but she is properly called Nicostrate. 2. Letters are either common or lib- eral. 'Common (communis) letters' are so called because many people employ them for common use, in order to write and to read. 'Liberal (liberalis) letters' are so called because only those who write books (liber), and who know how to speak and compose correctly, know them. 3. There are two types of letter, for they are first divided into two groups, vowels and consonants. Vow- els are letters that are released in various ways through the straightforward opening of the throat, without any contact. And they are called 'vowels' (vocalis), because they make a complete 'vocal sound' (vox, gen. vocis) on their own, and on their own they may make a sylla- ble with no adjoining consonant. Consonants are letters that are produced by various motions of the tongue or a compression of the lips. And they are called 'conso- nants' (consonans) because they do not produce sound by themselves, but rather 'sound together' (consonare) with an adjoining vowel. 4. Consonants are divided into two groups: semivowels and mutes. Semivowels (semivo- calis) are so called because they take a certain half (semis) of their quality from vowels. Their letter-names, accord- ingly, begin with the vowel E, and end in their natural sound [as F, L, M etc.]. The mutes (mutus, i.e. the voiced stops) are so called because, without vowels joined to them, they are never released. In fact, if you were to remove the sound of the following vowel from them,
the sound of the letter will be a blocked murmur [as B, G, D, etc.]. Furthermore, vowels and semivowels and mutes were called by the ancients sounds (sonus) and semisounds (semisonus) and non-sounds (insonus).
5. Among the vowels, I and U signify different things to the grammarians. 6. Now they are vowels, and now semivowels, and now medials (i.e. glides). They are vow- els because they make syllables when they are positioned alone or when they are joined to consonants. They are considered consonants in that they sometimes have a vowel set down after them in the same syllable, as Ianus, vates, and they are considered as consonants. 7. They are [also] called medials because only they naturally have a medial sound, as illius, unius. They sound more fully when joined to others, as Ianus, Vanus. They sound one way when alone and another when adjoined. On this account, I is sometimes called twofold, because when- ever it is found between two vowels, it is taken as two consonants, as Troia, for there its sound is geminated.
8. Further, the letter V is sometimes nothing, because in some places it is neither vowel nor consonant, as in quis (who). It is not a vowel, because I follows, and it is not a consonant, because Q precedes. And thus when it is neither vowel nor consonant, it is undoubtedly nothing. This same sound is called digamma by the Greeks, when it is joined to itself or to other vowels. And it is called digamma because it has the double shape of the letter F, which looks like two gammas (i.e. one T atop another). On account of this resemblance the grammarians would call the vowels conjoined in this way digamma, as in votum, virgo.
9. Among the semivowels, some are called liquids (liq- uidus) because sometimes, when placed after other con- sonants in one syllable, they are deficient and excluded from the meter. In Latin there are two sounds which melt (liquescere) like this, L and R, as in fragor (crash), flatus (breathing). The others, M and N, are liquid in Greek, as in Mnestheus.
10. 
The old script consisted of seventeen Latin letters, and they are called legitimate (legitimus) for this reason: they either begin with the vowel E and end in a mute sound, if they are consonants, or because they begin with their own sound and end in the vowel E, if they are mutes [and they are A, B, C, D, E, F, G, I, L, M, N, O, P, R, S, T and U].
11. The letter H was added afterwards for aspiration alone, whence it is considered by many to be a breathing, not a letter, and it is called a mark of aspiration because it elevates the voice, for aspiration is a sound that is raised more fully. Its opposite is prosodia, a sound accented levelly. 12. Salvius, the schoolmaster, first added the letter K to Latin, so as to make a distinction in sound between the two letters C and Q. This letter is called superfluous because, with the exception of the word 'Kalends,' it is considered unnecessary; we express all such sounds by means of C. 13. Neither Greek nor Hebrew has a sound corresponding to our letter Q, for with the exception of Latin no other language possesses this letter. It did not exist earlier; hence it is also called superfluous because the ancients wrote all such sounds with a C.
14. The letter X did not exist in Latin until the time of Augustus, [and it was fitting for it to come into existence at that time, in which the name of Christ became known, which is written using the letter which makes the sign of the cross], but they used to write CS in its place, whence X is called a double letter, because it is used for CS, so that it takes its name from the composition of these same letters. 15. Latin borrowed two letters from Greek, Y and Z, especially for the sake of writing Greek words. These letters were not written by the Romans until the time of Augustus, but two Ss were used for Z, as in hilarissat, and they would write I for Y.
16. There are three things associated with each letter: its name, how it is called; its shape, by which character it is designated; and its function, whether it is taken as vocalic or consonantal. Some people add 'order,' that is, what does it precede and what does it follow, as A is first and B following - for A is the first letter among all peoples, because it first initiates voice in babies as they are being born. 17. Indeed, nations assigned the names of the letters from the sounds in their own languages, when the sounds of the mouth were noted and distinguished. After they paid attention to these sounds, they imposed both names and shapes onthem. Theshapes they formed partly by whim, and partly from the sound of the letters;
for instance I and O - the first one is a thin sound, as it were, thusa slender twig, and the other a fat sound, thus a full shape.
Now nature has assigned the function, andhumanwill has assigned the order and the macron. 18. The ancients counted the macron among the letter characters, and it is called 'macron' (apex, lit. "peak") because it is far from the letter's foot, and is placed at the top of the letter. It is a line drawn horizontally and levelly above the letter. [Buta letter character (figura) is that with which a whole letter is written.]
v. Grammar (De grammatica) 1. Grammar is the knowledge of speaking correctly, and is the origin and foundation of liberal letters. Among the disciplines this was invented after the letters of the alphabet, so that through it those who have already learned the letters know the method of speaking correctly. 'Grammar' takes its name from letters, for the Greeks call letters ?p?µ- µata. 2. It is truly called an art, because it consists of strict (artus) rules and precepts. Others say that the word 'art' is derived by the Greeks from ?p?t?, that is, 'virtue,' which they called knowledge. 3. 'Oratory' (oratio) is so called as if it were 'method of speech' (oris ratio), for 'to orate' (orare) is to speak and to say. Oratory is the joining of words with sense. But a joining without sense is not oratory, because then there is no method in the speaking. Oratory is made up of sense, voice and letters. 4. Thirty divisions of the grammatical art are enumerated by some, that is: the eight parts of speech, enunciation, letters, syllables, feet, accent, punctuation, critical signs, spelling, analogy, etymology, glosses, dif- ferentiation, barbarisms, solecisms, faults, metaplasms, schemes, tropes, prose, meter, tales, and histories.
vi. The parts of speech (De partibus orationis) 1. Aris- totle first proposed two parts of speech, noun and verb; then Donatus defined eight (Ars Grammatica, ed. Keil 4.372). But all parts revert back to these two principal ones, that is, to the noun and verb, which signify the person and the act. The others are ancillary and derive their origin from these two. 2. For the pronoun is taken from the noun, whose function it assumes, as in 'an ora- tor . . . he' (orator ille). The adverb is taken from the noun, as in 'a learned one, learnedly' (doctus, docte). The participle is taken from the noun and the verb, as in 'I read, a reading one' (lego, legens). The conjunction
and preposition, however, and the interjection, occur in connection with these other parts. For this reason, some people define five parts of speech, because these latter three are superfluous.
vii. The noun (De nomine) 1. The noun (nomen) is so called as if it were 'denoter' (notamen), because by its designation it makes things known (noscere, ppl. notus) to us. Indeed, unless you know its name (nomen), the knowledge of a thing perishes.
Proper nouns (proprium nomen) are so called because they are specific; they signify one single person only. There are four types of proper nouns: the praenomen, the name, the cognomen, and the agnomen. The praenomen is so called because it is placed before (prae) the name, as 'Lucius,' 'Quintus.' 2. The name (nomen) is so called because it identifies (notare) the clan, as 'Cornelius,' for all Corneliuses are in this clan. The cog- nomen (cognomen), because it is conjoined (coniungere) to the name, as 'Scipio.' The agnomen (agnomen) is an 'acquired name' (accedens nomen), as in 'Metellus Creti- cus,' so named because he subdued Crete: the agnomen comes from some outside cause. But it too is commonly called a cognomen, because it is added to the name for the sake of recognition (cognitio), or because it is used 'with the name' (cum nomine).
3. Appellative nouns (appellativum nomen) are so called because they are common and make reference to many things (cf. appellare, "name"). They are divided into twenty-eight types. Of these the corporeal (corpo- ralis) nouns are so called because they are either seen or touched, as 'sky,' 'earth.' 4. The incorporeal (incor- poralis) nouns, because they lack a body (corpus), so that they cannot be seen or touched, as 'truth,' 'jus- tice.' 5. The general (generalis) nouns, because they denote many things, as 'animal,' for a human and a horse and a bird are animals. 6. The specific (specialis) nouns, because they indicate a sub-class, as 'man,' for a human being is a type (species) of animal. 7. Pri- mary (principalis) nouns, because they hold a primary
position, and are not derived from another word, as 'mountain,' 'fount.' 8. Derivative (derivativus) nouns, because they are derived from another noun, as 'moun- tainous region' (montanus) from 'mountain' (mons). 9. Diminutive (diminutivus) nouns, because they diminish the meaning, as 'Greekling' (Graeculus), 'little scholar' (scholasticulus). 10. Some nouns are called 'diminutive in sound' (sono diminutivus), because they sound like diminutive nouns, but are conceptually primary nouns, as 'table' (tabula), 'fable' (fabula). 11. 'Entirely Greek' (totus Graecus) nouns, because they are declined entirely in the Greek manner, as Callisto - for both Greek and Latin decline it in the same way. 12. 'Entirely Latin' (totus Latinus) nouns, because they are turned entirely into Latin. Greek has 'Odysseus,' and Latin 'Ulysses.'
13. Medial (medius) nouns are so called because they are partly Greek and partly Latin. These are also called 'mon- grel' (nothus), because they corrupt the final syllables while the previous syllables stay the same, as in Greek, for example, 'Alexandros,' 'Menandros,' while we (Latin speakers) have 'Alexander,' 'Menander.' They are called 'mongrel' inasmuch as whoever is begotten of unequal classes is called 'mongrel.' 14. Synonymous (synonymus) nouns, that is, plurinomial (plurinomius), because there is a single meaning shared by 'many nouns' (plura nom- ina), as terra, humus, and tellus (i.e. all meaning "earth"). Indeed, these are all the same thing. 15. Homonymous (homonymus) nouns, that is uninomial (uninomius), because there is a multiple meaning in one (unus) noun, as tumulus, which is in one context a low hill, in another context rising (tumere) ground, and in another context a grave-mound - for there are diverse meanings in the one noun. 16. The relational (relativus) nouns are so called because they are defined in relation to another person, as 'teacher,' 'master,' 'father.' 17. Words defined as somehow related to something by way of their oppo- sition of meaning are also called relational, as 'right' - for 'right' cannot be defined unless there is 'left.' 18. Next, the qualitative (qualitas) adjectives are so called
because through them some quality is shown, as 'wise,' 'beautiful,' 'rich.' 19. Quantitative (quantitas) adjectives are so called because they are defined by measure, as 'long,' 'short.' 20. Patronymics (patronymicus) are so called because they are derived from fathers (pater), as 'Tydides,' son of Tydeus, 'Aeneius,' son of Aeneas, although they may also be derived from mothers and from more remote ancestors. 21. 'Ctetic' (cteticus) adjec- tives, that is possessive, from possession, as the 'Evan- drian' sword. 22. Epithets (epitheton), which in Latin are called either adjectives (adiectivus) or additions, because they are 'added to' (adicere, ppl. adiectus) nouns to com- pletethemeaning, as 'great,' 'learned.' You mayaddthem to persons, as 'a great philosopher,' 'a learned man,' and the sense is complete. 23. Agent (actualis) nouns derive from the action (actus), as 'leader,' 'king,' 'runner,' 'nurse,' 'orator.' Ethnic (gens) adjectives come from the ethnic group (gens), as 'Greek,' 'Roman.' 24. Adjectives of nationality (patrius) come froma native land (patria), as 'Athenian,' 'Theban.' Local (locus) adjectives from the place (locus), as 'suburban.' 25. Verbal (verbialis) nouns are so called because they come from the verb, as 'reader' (lector, from legere, ppl. lectus, "read"). Participials (par- ticipalis), which have the same form as participles, as 'the reading one' (legens). 26. Quasi-verbal (verbis sim- ilis) nouns, so called from their similarity to the verb, as contemplator - for this word is botha verb in the impera- tive mood, future tense, and a noun, because it takes the comparative degree. Allthese types of appellative nouns come from the 'naming quality' (appellatio) of nouns.
27. A second division is the comparison of adjec- tives. 'Comparison' (comparatio) is so called because it prefers one thing in comparison with another. There are three degrees of comparison: positive, comparative, and superlative. 'Positive' (positivus) is so called because it is placed (ponere, ppl. positus) first in the degrees of com- parison, as 'learned' (doctus). 'Comparative' (compara- tivus) is so named because when compared (compara- tus) with the positive it surpasses it, as 'more learned' (doctior) - for he knows more than someone who is merely learned. 'Superlative' (superlativus) is so called because it completely surpasses (superferre, ppl. super- latus) the comparative, as 'most learned' (doctissimus), for he knows more than someone who is merely doctior.
28. 'Gendered nouns' (genus) are so called because they generate (generare), as masculine and feminine. Other nouns are not gendered, but analogy and tradition
have assigned them gender. A neuter (neuter, lit. "nei- ther") noun is so named because it is neither one nor the other, that is, neither masculine nor feminine. A com- mon (communis) noun is so called because one noun has a share in both genders, as hic canis ("this male dog") and haec canis ("this female dog"). 29. The opposite of this is an epicene (epicoenos) noun, because it expresses either sex with a single gender, as in hic piscis ("this fish"). It is of uncertain sex, because it can be distinguished neither by nature nor by sight, but only by expert discernment. The inclusive (omne genus) noun is so named because it serves for all genders: for masculine and feminine, neuter, common - for all (omnis).
30. 'Grammatical number' (numerus) is so named because it shows whether a noun is singular or plu- ral. 'Morphological form' (figura), because nouns are either simple or compound. 31. Cases (casus) are so called from 'having an ending' (cadere, ppl. casus): through the cases inflected nouns are varied and have their end- ings. The nominative (nominativus) case is so called because through it we name (nominare) something, as hic magister ("this teacher"). The genitive (genetivus), because through it we find the descent of someone, as huius magistri filius ("this teacher's son"), or because we assign a thing to someone, as huius magistri liber ("this teacher's book"). 32. The dative (dativus), because through it we show that we give (dare, ppl. datus) some- thing to someone, as da huic magistro ("give to this teacher"). The accusative (accusativus), because through it we accuse someone, as accuso hunc magistrum ("I accuse this teacher"). The vocative (vocativus), because through it we call (vocare) someone, as O magister ("hey, teacher!"). Ablative (ablativus), because through it we indicate that we take away (auferre, ppl. ablatus) some- thing from someone, as in aufer a magistro ("take from the teacher"). 33. Certain nouns and adjectives are called hexaptota because they have distinct inflection in six cases, as the word unus ("one"). Pentaptota, because they are declined in only five cases, as doctus ("learned"). Tetraptota, because they are only declined in four cases, as latus ("side"). Triptota because only in three, as tem- plum ("temple"). Diptota, because only in two, as Iup- piter ("Jupiter"). Monoptota, because they only use one case, as frugi ("thrifty"). 
viii. The pronoun (De pronomine) 1. The pronoun (pronomen) is so named because it is put 'in place of the
noun'(pro vice nominis), lest thenounitselfcauseannoy- ance when it is repeated. When we say, "Vergil wrote the Bucolics," we continue with the pronoun, "he (ipse) wrote the Georgics," and thus the variation in expression both removes annoyance and introduces ornament. 2. Pronouns are either definite or indefinite. Definite (fini- tus) pronouns are so called because they define (definire) a certain person, as ego ("I"); for you immediately under- stand this to be me. The indefinite (infinitus) ones are so named because the persons referred to are not certain. Indefinite pronouns are used for those who are absent or undetermined, as quis ("anyone" (masc. or fem.)), quae ("any" (fem.)), quod ("any" (neut.)). Some are called 'less than definite' (minus quam finitus), since they make mention of a known person, as ipse ("he him- self "), iste ("that one") - for we know who is spoken of. 3. Possessives (possessivus) are so called because they show that we possess something, for when I say meus ("my"), tuus ("your"), I define something as mine, or yours. Correspondent (relativus) pronouns are so called because they are said in response (refero, ppl. relatus) to a question, as "who is?" (quis est?) is answered by "he is" (is est). Demonstratives (demonstrativus), because they have the sense of indicating (demonstrare). By them we indicate someone who is present, as hic, haec, hoc ("this one" (masc., fem., and neut.)); these three are also called articles. 4. Articles (articulus) are so called because they are 'pressed together' (artare), that is, they are connected, with nouns, as when we say hic orator ("the orator"). There is this difference between the arti- cle and the pronoun: it is an article when it is joined to a noun, as hic sapiens ("the wise man"). But when it is not joined, then it is a demonstrative pronoun, as hic et
haec et hoc ("this one (masc.) and this (fem.) and this (neut)").
5. All pronouns are either primary or derived. Pri- mary (primogenis, lit. "born first") are so called because they do not take their origin from elsewhere. There are twenty-one of these. Three are definite: ego (I), tu (you), ille (he). Seven are indefinite: quis (who), qualis (what sort), talis (such), quantus (how much), tantus (so much), quotus (where in order), totus (such in order). There are six that are less than definite: iste (that one), ipse (he himself), hic (this one), is (he), idem (the same one), se (oneself, i.e. the 3rd person reflexive). There are five possessives: meus (my), tuus (your (sing.)), suus (his or her or their), noster (our), vester (your (pl.)). The rest are called derived, because they are derived and com- pounded from these, as quis-piam (whoever), ali-quis (someone), and the rest.
ix. The verb (De verbo) 1. The verb (verbum) is so called because it resounds by means of reverberation (verberatus) in the air, or because this part of speech often 'is involved' (versare) in a speech. Moreover, words (verbum) are signs of the mental processes with which people show their thoughts to one another in speaking. And just as a noun indicates a person, so a verb indicates the doing or speaking of a person. With respect to the subject of a verb, there is an indication of active or pas- sive. Thus scribo ("I write") is what a person is doing. Scribor ("I am written") also shows what a person is doing, but in this case a person who is undergoing the action.
2. There are two meanings for the Latin verbum: gram- matical and rhetorical. The verbum (i.e. the verb) of the grammarians conjugates in three tenses: preterit, present and future, as fecit ("he did"), facit ("he does"), faciet ("he willdo"). Inthe case of rhetoricians verba ("words") is used of their speech as a whole, as in verbis bonis nos cepit ("he captivated us with good words"), verba bona habuit ("he had good words"), where what is meant is not only the verba that fall into three tenses (i.e. the verbs), but the entire speech.
The qualities of verbs are: derivational forms, moods, conjugations, and voices [and tenses]. 3. 'Derivational forms' (forma) of verbs are so called because they inform (informare) us about some particular deed, for through
them we show what we are doing. The meditative (med- itativus) is named from the sense of someone intending (meditari), as lecturio ("I intend to read," formed on legere, ppl. lectus), that is, "I want to read." Following on from intention, the inchoative (inchoativus) verb is so called from its indication of beginning (incohare), as calesco ("I become warm," formed on calere, "be warm"). The frequentative (frequentativus) is so called from act- ing rather often, as lectito ("I read a lot"), clamito ("I yell a lot," formed on clamare). The derivational forms have a bearing on the meaning, and the moods have a bearing on the inflection. Furthermore, you do not know what the inflection should be unless you have already learned what the meaning is.
4. The moods (modus) of the verb are so called from the modality (quemadmodum, lit. "in what manner") of their sense. Thus the indicative (indicativus) mood is so called because it has the sense of someone indicating, as 'I read' (lego). The imperative (imperativus), because it has the tone of someone commanding (imperare), as 'read!' (lege). The optative (optativus), because through it we desire (optare) to do something, as 'would that I might read' (utinam legerem). The subjunctive (coniunctivus), because something is joined (coniungere) to it, so that the statement will be complete. Thus when you say, "when I yell" (cum clamem), the sense is left hanging. But if I say, "when Iyell, why do you think I am silent?" (cumclamem, quare putas quod taceam?), the sense is complete. 5. The infinitive (infinitus) [mood] is so called because, while it defines (definire) tenses, it does not define a person of the verb, as 'to yell' (clamare), 'to have yelled' (clamasse). If you add a person to it - 'I ought, you ought, he ought to yell' (clamare debeo, debes, debet)- it becomes a quasi- finite verb. The non-personal (impersonalis) is so called because it lacks the person of a noun or pronoun, as 'it is read' (legitur): you may add a person, as 'by me, by you, by him' (a me, a te, ab illo), and the sense is filled out. But the infinitive mood lacks a marker of person as part of its verb form, while the non-personal lacks a pronoun or noun to mark person.
6. The conjugation (coniugatio) is so called because through it many things are joined (coniungere) to one root sound. It shows the endings of the future tense, lest through ignorance one should say legebo for legam ("I will write"). Now the first and second conjuga- tion indicate the future tense by the endings -bo and
-bor, while the third conjugation shows it with -am and
-ar. 7. The voices (genus) of verbs are so named because they 'bring forth' (gignere, ppl. genitus). Thus you add r to the active and it brings forth the passive; conversely, you remove r from the passive and it brings forth the active. These are called active (activus) verbs because they act (agere, ppl. actus), as 'I whip' (verbero), and passive (passivus) verbs because they 'undergo action' (pati, ppl. passus), as 'I am whipped' (verberor); neutral (neutralis) verbs, because they neither act nor undergo action, as 'Iam lying down' (iaceo), 'Iam sitting' (sedeo)- for if you add the letter r to these, they do not sound Latin. Common-voiced (communis) verbs are so called because they both act and undergo action, as amplector ("I embrace, I am embraced"). Similarly, these, if the letter r is removed, are not Latin. Deponent (deponens) verbs are so called because they 'set aside' (deponere) the passive meaning of their future participles; this form ends in -dus, as gloriandus ("worthy of boasting"). 
x. The adverb (De adverbio) 1. The adverb (ad- verbium) is so named because it 'comes near the verb' (accedere < ad-cedere verbum), as in 'read well' (bene lege). 'Well' (bene) is the adverb, and 'read' (lege) is the verb. Therefore, the adverb is so called because it is always completed when joined to the verb, for a verb by itself has complete sense, as 'I write' (scribo). But an adverb without a verb does not have a full meaning, as 'today' (hodie). You 'add a verb' (adicis . . . verbum) to this, 'I write today' (hodie scribo), and with the added verb you have completed the sense.
xi. The participle (De participio) The participle (par- ticipium) is so called because it takes (capere) the func- tions (partes) of both the noun and the verb, as if it were parti-capium - for from the noun it takes gender and case, and from the verb tense and meaning, and from both, number and form.
xii. The conjunction (De conjunctione) 1. The con- junction (coniunctio) is so called because it 'joins together' (coniungere) meanings and phrases, for con- junctions have no force on their own, but in their com- bining of other words they present, as it were, a cer- tain glue. They either link nouns, as "Augustine and (et) Jerome", or verbs, as "he writes and (et) he reads." Con- junctions all share a single power: either they join, or
they disjoin. 2. Copulative (copulativus) conjunctions are so called because they join meaning or persons, as "let's go, you and (et) I, to the forum." The et joins the meanings. Disjunctive (disiunctivus) conjunctions are so called because they disjoin things or persons, as "let's do it, you or (aut) I." Subjoined (subiunctivus) conjunc- tions are so called because they are attached behind (sub- iungere), as -que ("and"). Thus we say regique hominique Deoque ("and for the king and the person and God"); we do not say que regi, que homini.
3. Expletive (expletivus) conjunctions are so called because they 'fill out' (explere) the topic proposed, as in "if you don't want this, 'at least' (saltim) do that." Common (communis) conjunctions are named thus, because they are placed [and joined] any- where, as igitur hoc faciam ("therefore I will do this"), hoc igitur faciam ("this therefore I will do").
4. Causal (causalis) conjunctions are named from the reason (causa) that people intend to do something, for example, "I kill him, because (quia) he has gold"; the second clause is the reason. Rational (rationalis) con- junctions are so called from the reasoning (ratio) that someone uses in acting, as, "How may I kill him 'so that' (ne) I won't be recognized? By poison or blade?"
xiii. The preposition (De prepositione) The prepo- sition (praepositio) is so called because it is placed before (praeponere, ppl. praepositus) nouns and verbs. Accusative (accusativus) and ablative (ablativus) prepo- sitions are so called from the cases that they govern. Loquellares - so called because they always join to an utterance (loquella), that is, to words - have no force when they stand alone, as di-, dis-. But when joined to a word, they make a word-form, as diduco ("I divide"), distraho ("I pull apart").
xiv. The interjection (De interjectione) The interjec- tion (interiectio) - so called because it is interjected (intericere, ppl. interiectus), that is, interposed, between
meaningful phrases - expresses the emotion of an excited mind, as when vah is said by someone exulting, heu by someone grieving, hem by someone angry, ei by some- one afraid. These sounds are specific to each language, and are not easily translated into another language.
xv. Letters in grammar (De litteris apud grammati- cos) [There are as many of these as there are articu- lated sounds. And one is called a letter (littera), as if the word were legitera, because it provides a road (iter) for those reading (legere), or because it is repeated (iterare) in reading.] (See iii.3 above.)
xvi. The syllable (De syllaba) 1. The Greek term 'syl- lable' (syllaba) is called a combination (conceptio) or gathering (complexio) in Latin. It is named 'syllable' from ou22aµß?v?tv t? ?p?µµata, that is, 'to combine letters,' for ou22?µßav?tv means "combine." Hence a true syl- lable is one made up of several letters, for a single vowel is improperly spoken of as a syllable, but not correctly: it should be called not so much a syllable as a marking of time. Syllables are short, long, or common. 2. Short (brevis) are so called because they can never be drawn out. Long (longus), because they are always drawn out. Common (communis), because they are either drawn out or shortened according to the writer's judgment as exigency compels. On this read Donatus. Syllables are called long and short because, due to their varying lengths of sound, they seem to take either a double or single period of time. 'Diphthong' (dipthongus) syllables are so called from the Greek word (i.e. from 6t-, "dou- ble" + ??9ó??oç, "sound"), because in them two vowels are joined. 3. Of these, we have four true diphthongs: ae, oe, au, eu. Ei was in common use only among the ancients.
A syllable is called a semi-foot (semipes) by those who analyze meter, because it is half of a metrical foot: since a foot consists of two syllables, a single syllable is half a foot. Dionysius Lintius (i.e. Dionysius Thrax) devised the most appropriate individual patterns for all syllables, and on this account was honored with a statue.
xvii. 
Metrical feet (De pedibus) 1. Feet (pes) are what last for a certain time-span of syllables, and never alter their fixed span. They are called 'feet' because in using them the meters 'walk.' Just as we step with our feet, so the meters also advance, as it were, by means of feet. There are 124 different feet in all: four two-syllable feet, eight three-syllable, sixteen four-syllable, thirty- two five-syllable, and sixty-four six-syllable. Up to four syllables they are called feet; the rest are called syzy- gies (syzygia). 2. These feet have specific reasons for the names by which they are called.
The pyrrhic (pyrrichius) foot is so called because it was used habitually in contests or quite often in children's games. The spondee (spondeus) is so called because it has a prolonged sound, for spondeus is the name of a certain droning, that is, the sound that would flow over the ears of those performing a sacrifice. Hence those who would play the pipes in the pagan rites were named 'spondials.' 3. The trochee (trochaeus) is so called because it makes speedy alternations in a song, and runs quickly in meters like a wheel - for a wheel is called tpoyóç in Greek. 4. The iamb (iambus) is so called because the Greeks say "aµßóS?tv for 'detract' (detrahere, ppl. detrac- tus). Poets were accustomed to perform all their invec- tive or abuse (detractio) with poetry of this type. And the name comes from this, in that in some way it infuses a sort of poison of malediction or spite.
5. The tribrach (tribrachys), which is also called cho- rius, is named tribrach because it consists of three short syllables (see section 9 below). 6. The molossus (Molos- sus) is named from the dancing of the Molossians, which they performed while armed. 7. The anapest (anapaes- tus) [is so called because this foot is dedicated more to relaxation and games]. 8. The dactyl (dactylus) is named from 'finger' (cf. 6?mtu2oç), because it begins with a longer measure, and ends in two shorts. Thus this foot has one long joint and two shorts. Also an open hand is called a palm, and the dangling fingers are dactyls. 9. The amphibrach (amphibrachys, cf. ?µj(c), "on both sides"), because it has a short on either side and a long lying in the middle - for a short is called ßpayáç. 10. The amphimacrus, because two longs have a short enclosed between them, for a long is called µampóç. 11. The bacchius is so called because with this foot the Bacchanals, that is, the rites of the god Liber (i.e. Bacchus), are celebrated. 12. The antibacchius, or palimbacchius, is so called because it is a reversal of the
bacchius. 13. The proceleusmatic (proceleumaticus, i.e. proceleusmaticus), because it is appropriate for the 'work chant' (celeuma) of people singing. 14. The dispondeus and ditrochaeus and diiambus are so called because they are double iambs, spondees, and trochees. 15. The anti- spastus, because it is made of opposing syllables: from a short and a long, then a long and a short. 16. The cho- riamb (choriambus), because the song most appropriate for 'a band of singers and dancers' (chorus) is composed with this foot. 17. The ionic (ionicus) feet are with good reason named from the uneven (inaequalis) sound of their rhythm, for they have two long syllables and two short. 18. The paeonic (paeon) feet are named from their inventor. [They consist of one long and three shorts, and the long syllable is placed in various positions cor- responding to the name (i.e. first paeon, second paeon, etc.)]. 19. Epitrites (epitritus) are so called because they always have three long syllables and one short. 20. Syzy- gies (syzygia) are feet with five and six syllables, and they are called ouSu?(c)at in Greek, as are certain declen- sions. These are not actually feet, but they are called pen- tasyllables and hexasyllables, since they do not exceed five and six syllables. Hence it is not possible for any word in a poem to exceed this number of syllables, such as Carthaginiensium ("of Carthaginians"), Hierosolymi- tanorum ("of Jerusalemites"), and Constantinopolitano- rum ("of Constantinopolitans").
21. In each foot there occurs an arsis (arsis) and a thesis (thesis), that is, a raising and lowering of the voice - for the feet would not be able to follow a road unless they were alternately raised and lowered. For example, in arma (arms), ar- is the raising, and -ma the lowering. Properly constituted feet are comprised of a distribution of these two. The proportion is equal (aequus) whenever arsis and thesis are cut with an equal division of time. 22. The proportion is duple (duplus) whenever one of them exceeds the other twofold. The proportion is sescuple (sescuplus) whenever one exceeds the other by half again as much (i.e. a proportion of two and three). In the smaller member of this foot one unit more than the minimum is found, and in the larger member one unit less than the maximum, for sescum is a word for 'half.' The proportion is triple (triplus) when the larger part contains the entire smaller part three times: that is, a proportion of three to one. It is epitrite (epitritus), when the smaller part is contained in the larger, plus a third part of the smaller (i.e. a proportion of three and four,
since four is equal to three plus one third of three). The members of feet are divided either in equal proportion, or double, or sescuple, or triple, or epitrite.
23. We divide these into equal members:
Spondee   	Pyrrhic	??
Dactyl	??	Anapest	??  Dispondeus  	Proceleusmatic ?? ?? Diiambus  ?  ?	Ditrochaeus		 ?  ? Antispastus  ?  ?	Choriamb		? ?
24. Further, we divide these feet in a duple rhythm:
Trochee	?	Iamb	? 
Molossus		Tribrach	? ??
Ionic major   ??	Ionic minor ?? 
25. [There is only one that has triple proportion, which is the most extreme proportion and is therefore present in few meters.]
Amphibrach  ?  ?
26. The ones with sescuple division are these:
Amphimacrus	?	Bacchius	?  Antibacchius	?	First Paeon	??? Second Paeon	?  ??	Third Paeon	??  ? Fourth Paeon	??? 
27. We divide the rest into the epitrite proportion:
First Epitrite	? 	Second Epitrite	?  Third Epitrite	?	Fourth Epitrite ?
There are, therefore, ten feet with equal proportion, six with duple proportion, one with triple proportion, seven with sescuple proportion, and four with epitrite proportion. And there is only one that has triple pro- portion, which is the most extreme proportion and is therefore present in few meters. 28. The number of syl- lables possible ina foot ranges fromtwo to six; it proceeds no further, because feet extend to six syllables only.
There are time-intervals in feet, corresponding to the quantity that each foot has. Resolution (resolutio) of feet occurs when two shorts take the place of one long, or four shorts the place of two longs, as (Vergil, Aen. 2.16):
Sectaque intexunt abiete costas. (They frame the ribs with sawn fir.)
Abiete here is a resolution of a spondee into a proceleusmatic; it is always following a synaloephis (i.e.
a fusion of two vowels into one syllable) that Vergil uses this resolution. 29. Although two shorts can take the place of one long, one long can never take the place of two shorts, for solid things can be divided, but divided things cannot be made solid.
There is a notation by whose mark syllables are recog- nized, for when you see the lower half of a circle written
twice, it is a Pyrrhic foot: ??, where you see two hori- zontal Is, it is a spondee: - -. So a short is marked with
a lower half-circle, and a long with a horizontal I. 30. Meter is built from feet, such as trochaic meter from the trochee, dactylic from the dactyl, iambic from the iamb; we will speak a little later concerning this.
xviii. Accents (De accentibus) 1. The accent (accentus), which is called 'prosody' (prosodia) in Greek, [takes its name from Greek], for the Greek word ppóç is the Latin ad ("to"), and the Greek ?6, ? is the Latin cantus ("song"; i.e. accentus < ad + cantus) - so this term is translated word for word. Latin speakers also have other names for it. They say 'accent' and 'pitch' (tonus) and 'tenor' (tenor), because at that place the soundincreases and falls away. 2. 'Accent' is so called because it is joined to song (cantus), in the same way that the 'adverb' is so called because it is joined to the verb (see chapter x above). The acute (acutus) accent is so called because it sharp- ens (acuere) and raises the syllable; the grave (gravis, lit. "heavy") accent, because it depresses and lowers, for it is the opposite of the acute. The circumflex (circumflexus) is so called because it consists of an acute and a grave. Thus beginning as an acute it ends as a grave, and when it thus rises and then falls, it makes a 'turning around' (circumflexus). 3. The acute and the circumflex are sim- ilar, for they both raise the syllable. The grave accent is
regarded as opposite to both of them, for it always lowers the syllable, while they raise it, as (Lucan, Civil War 1.15):
Unde venit Titan, et nox ibi sidera condit.
(Whence Titan comes, and there night conceals the stars.)
Unde ("whence") is grave here, (i.e. its pitch lowers as we move from the first to the second syllable). It has a lower sound than the acute and the circumflex.
4.A monosyllabic word will have an acute accent if it is short by nature, as vir ("man"), or long by position, as ars ("art"). But if it is long by nature, as re¯s ("thing"), then it has a circumflex. A disyllabic word, if its first syllable is long by nature and the second short, has a circumflex, as Mu¯ sa; otherwise it has an acute. If a three-syllable word has a short middle syllable, as tibia ("shin"), then we make the first syllable acute. If it has a second syllable long by nature, and a short final syllable, as Mete¯llus, then we make the middle syllable circumflex. 5. Four- and five-syllable words are controlled by the pattern for three-syllable words. The grave accent can occur with another single accent in a single word, but never with two, as [Catullus]. In a compound word there is a single accent. 
6. Accents were invented either for the sake of distin- guishing, as (Vergil, Aen. 8.83):
Viridique in litore conspicitur sus
(And a pig is seen on the green shore)
so that you won't say ursus ("bear"); or for the sake of pronunciation, lest you pronounce meta as short and not as me¯ta, with its a lengthened; or because of an ambiguity which must be resolved, as ergo. When the
-go is lengthened, the word signifies a reason (i.e. "on account of"); when it is short, it signifies a conjunction (i.e. "therefore"). 
xix. Accent marks (De figuris accentuum) 1. There are ten accent marks, which are supplied by grammarians to distinguish words. ' O(?±a, that is the acute accent, a line drawn upwards from the left side to the right, is made thus: ´. 2. Bap?±a, that is, grave, a line drawn from the upper left down to the right, is made thus:
`. 3. W?ptopYµsv?, that is, circumflex, a line made of an acute and a grave, is represented thus: ?. 4. Mampóç, that is, a long mark (i.e. macron), is a horizontal stroke, thus: ¯. 5. Bpayáç, that is, the short, is the lower part of a
circle, lying thus: ?. 6. 'T??sv, that is, a joining (coni- unctio), because it connects (conectere) two words, is a
stroke drawn down that curves back at the line, thus: 
7. Diastole, that is, a distinction (distinctio), which sep- arates something from its opposite: the right half of a circle drawn down to the line:  8. The 'apostrophe' (apostrophus), also the right half of a circle, and placed at the upper part of a letter, is thus: '. By this mark it is shown that the final vowel in a word is lacking, as tribunal' for tribunale. 9. Aao?±a, which is translated as "aspiration" (aspiratio, i.e. the rough breathing), that is, where the letter H ought to be put, is marked by this shape: . 10. Wt2?, which is translated as "dryness" (sic- citas, i.e. the smooth breathing), or "a pure sound" - that is, where the letter H ought not to be - is expressed with this shape: . 11. Latin speakers made the shapes of these two accent-marks from the letter of aspiration itself. Whence, if you join them, you will have made that same mark of aspiration (i.e. H). Conversely, if you split it at the midpoint, you make a 6ao?±a and a yt2?.
xx. Punctuated clauses (De posituris) 1.A punctuated clause is a form for distinguishing meaning through colons, commas, and periods, which, when placed in their proper spot, show the sense of the reading to us. They are called 'punctuated clauses' (positura) either because they are marked by points that are set down (ponere, ppl. positus), or because there the voice is low- ered (deponere, ppl. depositus) to make an interval witha pause. Greek speakers call them 9so?tç, and Latin speak- ers, positurae. 2. The first punctuated clause is called the subdivision, and it is the same as a comma. The middle punctuation follows: it is the colon. The final punctuation, which closes the entire sentence, is the period.
The colon and the comma are parts of the sentence, as we have said. The difference between them is indi- cated by points placed in different spots. 3. For where the speech has begun and the sense is not yet complete, but it is necessary to take a breath, a comma occurs, that is, a part of the sense, and a point is placed even with the bottom of the letter. This is called the 'subdi- vision' (subdistinctio) because it takes the point below (subtus), that is, at the bottom of the line. 4. And where, in the following words, the sentence now makes sense but something still remains for the completion of the sentence, a colon occurs, and we mark it by a point even
with the middle of the letter. And we call this the 'middle' (medius) punctuation, because we place the point at the middle of the letter. 5. But when, by proceeding through the speech, we make a complete closure of the sentence, a period occurs, and we place a point even with the top of the letter. This is called a distinctio, that is, a disjunction, because it sets apart a whole sentence. 6. This is the usage among orators. On the other hand, among the poets, a comma occurs in the verse when, after two feet, there is still a syllable remaining in the word, because a break in the word is made there according to metrical scansion. But when no part of the speech still remains after two feet, it is a colon. And the entire verse is a period. 
xxi. Critical signs (De notis sententiarum) 1. In addi- tion to these, there were certain critical signs (nota) used in writing the works of the most famous authors; the ancients placed these in poems and histories to annotate the writing. The critical sign is a specific shape placed in the manner of a letter, to show a particular judgment about a word or sentences or verses. There are twenty-six marks which may be placed in verse, given below with their names:
2.  The asterisk is placed next to omissions, so that things which appear to be missing may be clarified through this mark, for star is called ?ot?p in Greek, and the term 'asterisk' (asteriscus) is derived from this.
3. - The obolus, that is, a horizontal stroke, is placed next to words or sentences repeated unnecessarily, or by places where some passage is marked as false, so that, like an arrow, it slays the superfluous and pierces the false, for an arrow is called òß?2óç in Greek. 4.  An obolus with a point above it is put next to those places, about which there is some doubt as to whether they ought to be taken out or kept. [It is marked as false.] 5.  The lem- niscus, that is, a horizontal stroke between two points, is put next to those places that translators of Holy Writ
have rendered with the same meaning but with different words.
6.  The antigraphus with a point is placed where there is a different meaning in the translations. 7. - The aster- isk with obolus: Aristarchus used this specifically next to those verses not placed in their proper location. 8.  The paragraph (paragraphus) is placed so as to separate topics which run on in sequence, just as in a catalog, places are separated from each other, and regions from each other, and in the competitions, prizes are separated from each other, and contests from other contests. 9.  The positura is a mark opposite to the paragraph. It is shaped this way because, just as the paragraph marks beginnings, this one separates ends from beginnings. 10.  The cryphia, the lower half of a circle with a point, is put next to those places where a difficult and obscure question cannot be answered or solved. 11.  The anti- simma is placed at those verses whose order should be transposed. It is found so placed in ancient authors also.
12.  The antisimma with a point is put next to those places where there are two verses with the same mean- ing, and it is doubtful which one should be selected.
13. > The diple. Our scribes place this in books of churchmen to separate or to make clear the citations of Sacred Scriptures. 14.  The diple p?p(c) ot(c)yov ("with a point"). Leogoras of Syracuse first placed this next to Homeric verses to distinguish Mount Olympus from the heavenly Olympus. 15.  The diple p?pt?ott?µsv?, that is, with two points. The ancients set this next to the verses which Zenodotus of Ephesus incorrectly added, or removed, or transposed. Our scribes also have used this same sign next to those verses. 16.  The diple òßo2to- µsv? is interposed to separate the speeches in comedies and tragedies. 17.  The reverse òßo2toµsv?, whenever the strophe and the antistrophe are introduced. 18.  The reverse diple with obolus is placed next to those passages that refer back to something, as (cf. Vergil, Aen. 10.88):
Do I try to overturn the state of Troy from its foundation for you? I? Or is it he who threw the miserable Trojans to the Greeks? 
19.  The diple with an obolus above it is placed next to passages representing changed conditions of places, times, and people. 20.  The diple pointing right and
reversed with an obolus above is used when a unit is completed in that place, and signifies that something similar follows.
21.  The ceraunium is placed whenever a set of verses is rejected and not marked individually with an obolus; for lightning is called m?paávtov in Greek. 22.  The
chrisimon: this is placed according to each person's indi- vidual desire to mark something. 23.  Phi and Rho, that is, ??povt(c)ç (i.e. "attention"): this is placed where there is something obscure requiring close attention. 24.  The upward anchor is placed where there is some exceed- ingly great subject matter. 25.  The downward anchor, where something done most basely and improperly is denounced. 26.  The mark of the corona is only placed at the end of a book. 27.  The alogus is the mark [that] is placed beside errors.
28. There are also other small marks (i.e. signes de renvoi) made in books for drawing attention to things that are explained at the edges of the pages, so that when the reader finds a sign of this type in the margin he may know that it is an explanation of the same word or line that he finds with a similar mark lying above it when he turns back to the text.
xxii. Common shorthand signs (De notis vulgaribus)
1. Ennius first invented eleven hundred common signs. These signs were used in this way: several scribes stand- ing by together would write down whatever was said in a trial or judgment, with the sections distributed among them so that each scribe would take down a certain num- ber of words in turn. In Rome, Tullius Tiro, a freedman of Cicero's, first devised such signs, but only for preposi- tions. 2. After him, Vipsanius, Philargius, and Aquila, another freedman of Maecenas, added others. Then, after the total number of signs had been collected, set in order, and increased in number, Seneca produced a work with five thousand signs. They are called 'signs' (nota) because they would designate (notare) words and sylla- bles by predetermined characters and recall them to the knowledge (notitia) of readers. Those who have learned these signs are properly called stenographers (notarius) today.
xxiii. Signs used in law (De notis iuridicis) 1. In books of law certain letters stand for words; in this way the writ- ing becomes quicker and shorter. So, for instance, bonum factum ("good deed") would be written as BF, senatus
consultum ("senate decree") as SC, respublica ("repub- lic") as RP, populus Romanus ("Roman people") as PR, dumtaxat ("at least") as DT, mulier ("woman") by the upside-down letter M, pupillus ("male orphan") by a regular P, pupilla ("female orphan") by a with the top reversed, caput ("head") by a single K, calumniae causa ("case of false accusation") by two joined KK, iudex esto ("let the judge be present") by IE, dolum malum ("grievous fraud") by DM. 2. We find very many similar signs of this type in ancient books. Recent emperors have ordained that these legal signs be abolished from codes of law, because shrewd people were cleverly deceiving many ignorant people by means of these signs. So the emperors ordered that full words should be used to write the laws, so that they would cause no errors or ambigu- ities, but would clearly show what must be obeyed and what must be avoided.
xxiv. Military signs (De notis militaribus) 1. The ancients also used a special sign in the rosters that con- tained the names of soldiers; by this sign it could be seen how many of the soldiers were still alive and how many had fallen in battle. The sign tau, T, placed at the begin- ning of the line indicated a survivor, while theta, T, was placed by the name of each of the slain. Therefore this letter has a spear through the middle, which is the sign of death. Concerning which Persius says (Satires 4.13):
And he is able to affix the black theta to crime.
2. But when they wanted to indicate ignorance (i.e. as to whether a soldier was alive or dead), they used the letter lambda, just as they would indicate death when they would put theta at the head of the line. There were also special signs for the payment of stipends.
xxv. Epistolary codes (De notis litterarum) 1. Our pre- decessors also used to establish between themselves epis- tolary codes, so that they might write back and forth with these signs whatever they wanted to write secretly to each other. Brutus is an example: he used to indicate with these codes what he was about to do, while every- one else was unaware of what the coded letters meant for him. 2. Caesar Augustus also said to his son: "Since innu- merable things are constantly occurring about which we must write to each other, and which must be secret, let us have between us code-signs, if you will, such that, when something is to be written in code, we will replace each
letter with the following letter in this way: b for a, c for b, and then the rest in the same way. For the letter z, we will return to a double aa." Some also write with the words reversed.
xxvi. Finger signals (De notis digitorum) 1. There are also some signals for the fingers, and for eyes as well, by which those at a distance can silently communicate with each other. This is the custom with the military: when the army is agreeing on an action they signal assent with their hands, because they cannot use their voices. Some, because they cannot speak a greeting, use a motion of the sword. 2. Ennius, speaking of a certain shameless woman, says (Naevius, Comedies 52):
Tossing from hand to hand in a ring of players like a ball, she gives herself and makes herself common. She embraces one, nods to another, and her hand is occupied with yet another, she pinches the foot of another, gives to another a ring to look at, calls another by blowing a kiss, sings with another, and to still others gives signals with her finger.
And Solomon (Proverbs 6:13): "He winketh with the eyes, presseth with the foot, and speaketh with the fin- ger."
xxvii. Orthography (De orthographia) 1. The Greek term 'orthography' (orthographia) is translated into Latin as 'correct writing' [for orto means "correctly" and graphia "writing"]. This discipline teaches how we should spell, for just as grammatical art treats of the inflection of parts of speech, so orthography treats of the skill of spelling. For instance, ad ("to"): when it is a preposition it takes the letter D, but when it is a conjunc- tion, the letter T (i.e. at, "but"). 2. Haud ("scarcely"), when it is an adverb of negation, ends in the letter D and is aspirated initially. But when it is a [disjunctive] conjunction, it is written with the letter T and without aspiration (i.e. aut, "or"). 3. The preposition apud ("at") is written with a D, as in ad patrem ("at the father"), because our predecessors often used apud for ad [hav- ing removed two of the middle letters.] 
4. But sometimes letters are correctly put in place of other letters. There is a certain kinship between the let- ters B and P, for we say Pyrrhus for Burrus. [The letters] C and G have a certain kinship. Thus while we say centum ("hundred") and trecentos ("three hundred"), after that we say quadringentos ("four hundred"), putting G for C. Similarly there is a kinship between C and Q, for we write huiusce ("of this") with C and cuiusque ("of each") with a
Q. The preposition cum ("with") should be written with a C, but if it is a conjunction ("while"), then it should be written with a Q, for we say quum lego ("while I speak"). Deus ("God") is written with an E alone, but daemon ("demon") should be marked by the diphthong AE. 5. Equus ("horse"), which is the animal, should be written with E alone, but aequus, which means "just," should be written with the diphthong AE. Exsul ("exile") should be written with the S added, because an exile is some- one who is 'outside the land' (extra solum). Exultat ("he exults) is better written without the letter S. For, since X is made up of C and S, why, when the sound is already contained in it, should a second one be added to it?
6. Aequor ("the level sea") should be written with a diphthong (i.e. not with E alone), because the name is made from aqua ("water"). 7. Forsitan ("perhaps") should be written with N at the end, because its full form is si forte tandem ("if by chance indeed"). 8. Fedus, that is, 'deformed,' should be written with an E alone; foe- dus, that is, 'pact,' should be written with the diphthong OE. 9. Formosus ("beautiful") is written without an N (i.e. not formonsus), because it is so called from forma ("beauty"), [or from formus, that is, 'warm'; for warmth of blood produces beauty]. Gnatus ("offspring"), that is, 'son,' should be written with a G, because it repre- sents generatus ("begotten"). 10. H, which is the letter of aspiration, is joined in Latin only to vowels, as honor, homo ("man"), humus ("soil"), [humilitas ("humility")]. There is also aspiration with consonants, but only in Greek and Hebrew words. The interjections heus and heu should also be written with an H.
11. Some think that the letter I occurring between two vowels, as in Troia, Maia, should be written twice. Logic, however, does not permit this, for three vowels are never
written in a single syllable. But the letter I occurring between two vowels does have a double sound (i.e. in metrical scansion). 12. The neuter pronoun id ("it") is written with a D, because the paradigm is is, ea, id ("he, she, it") since it makes the word idem ("the same"). But if it is a third person verb, it is identified by the letter T, because the paradigm is eo, is, it ("I go, you go, he/she/it goes") [since it makes the form] itur ("is traveled"). 
13. The ancients placed the letter K first whenever an A followed, as in kaput ("head"), kanna ("reed"), kalamus ("cane"). But now only Karthago ("Carthage") and kalendae ("Calends") are written with this letter. However, all Greek words witha following vowel of any sort are written with a K. 14. Laetus ("joyful") is written with a diphthong, because 'joyfulness' (laetitia) is so called from 'wideness' (latitudo), the opposite of which is sorrow, which causes constriction. We sometimes use the letter L for the letter D, as in latum ("carried") for datum ("given") and calamitatem for cadamitatem, for the word 'calamity' is derived from 'falling' (cadendum).
15. There is a question about how maxumus or max- imus ("greatest"), and any similar pairs, ought to be writ- ten. Varro relates that Caesar was accustomed to pro- nounce and write words of this type with an I. Hence, based on the authority of so great a man, it became the practice that maximus, optimus ("best"), pessimus ("worst") were written. 16. Malo ("I prefer") should be written with one L, because it is magis volo ("I wish rather"). But the infinitive malle ("to prefer") has two Ls because it is magis velle ("to wish rather"). Nolo ("I am unwilling") also with one L, and nolle ("to be unwilling") with two, for nolo is ne-volo ("I do not want") and nolle is ne-velle ("not to want").
17. Os, if it means "face" or "bone" should be written withan O alone; if it refers to a person, an H shouldbe put first (i.e. hos, plural accusative of the demonstrative). 18. Ora ("shores"), associated with boundaries, should be written with an O; hora ("hour"), associated with days, with an H. Onus, if it means "burden," should be written with an O alone; if it means "honor," written with the aspiration of an H (i.e. honos). 19. Praepositio ("preposi- tion") and praeterea ("besides") should be written with diphthongs. Further, pene ("almost"), which is a con- junction, with E; poena, which is 'punishment' with OE.
20. The letter Q is correctly placed when it has the letter U immediately following, and they are followed by any other vowel or vowels, so that a single syllable
is made. The rest are written with C. 21. The pronoun quae ("which, who") should be written with an A, the conjunction -que ("and") without an A. 22. Quid ("what") is written with a D when it is a pronoun, and with a T when it is the verb whose paradigm appears sim- ply, as queo, quis, quit ("I can, you can, he/she/it can"), and in the compound nequeo, nequis, nequit ("I cannot, you cannot, he/she/it cannot"). Quod ("that") when it is a pronoun should be written with D, whena numeric term with T (i.e. quot, "as many"), because totidem ("just as many") is written with T. Quotidie ("daily") should be written with Q, not C (i.e. cotidie), since it is quot diebus ("on as many days").
23. The letter R has a connection with the letter S, for the ancients said honos, labos, arbos, but now we say honor, labor, arbor ("tree"). 24. Sat ("enough") must be written with T, because its complete form is satis. Sed ("but") must be written with a D, for sed was pro- nounced as sedum by the ancients; we have cut off the final two letters. 25. Tantus ("so much") as well as quan- tus ("as much") used to have the letter M in the middle, for it was from quam ("as") and tam ("so") - whence also quamtitas, quamtus, tamtus. 26. The interjection vae ("woe") should be written with an A, the conjunction ve ("or") without. 27. Xp¯s ("Christ"), because it is Greek, should be written with an X, so also xrisma ("chrism").
28. Only Greek words are written with the letters Y and Z, for although the letter Z expresses the sound in iustitia ("justice"), still, because the word is Latin, it must be written with a T. So also militia ("military"), malitia ("malice"), nequitia ("worthlessness"), and other similar words. 29. Also, the practice among our predecessors for ambiguous words was this: when it has one meaning with a short vowel, and another with the same vowel length- ened, they would place a macron over the long syllable. For example, whether populus would mean 'the poplar tree' (i.e. po¯pulus) or 'a multitude of people' would be distinguished by the macron. Moreover, whenever con- sonants were doubled, they placed a mark called sicilicus (i.e. a mark shaped like a sickle, ) above, as in the words cella, serra, asseres. Our predecessors did not use dou- ble letters, but they would write a sicilicus above, and by this mark the reader was alerted that the letter would be doubled.
xxviii. Analogy (De analogia) 1. The Greek term 'anal- ogy' (analogia) is called in Latin the comparison (conpa-
ratio) or 'regular relation' (proportio) of similar things. Its force is that something doubtful is compared to a similar thing that is not doubtful, and uncertain things are explained by means of things that are certain. A com- parison by analogy can be drawn from eight features: that is, from quality, from the comparative degree, from gen- der, from number, from form, from case, from endings with similar syllables, and from the similarity of tenses.
2. If any one of these is lacking, it is no longer analogy, that is, similarity, but rather anomaly, that is, outside the rule, such as lepus ("hare") and lupus ("wolf"). They cor- respond entirely, except that they differ in case endings, as we say lupi ("of the wolf"), but leporis ("of the hare"). Thus the regular pattern is that when you ask whether trames ("footpath") is masculine or feminine, it is sim- ilar to limes ("boundary-path") in its entire declension, and so must be masculine.
3. And again, if you think that funis ("rope") is of uncertain gender, it is similar to panis ("bread") in its entire declension, and so must be masculine. And again, from a comparison of the positive degree, so if you say doctus ("learned"), you will also say magnus ("big"), for they are both positives and similar to each other. This also occurs with diminutives. For example, funicu- lus ("small rope," with an obviously masculine ending) shows that funis ("rope") is masculine, just as marmuscu- lum ("small block of marble," with an obviously neuter ending) shows that marmor ("marble") is of neuter gen- der. 4. For the gender of the principal form is usually also the gender of the diminutive. But this is not always so, as in pistrinum ("pounding-mill" - neuter), but pistrilla ("little pounding-mill" - feminine). Nevertheless, just as we ought to know the declension by comparison of the ending, [that is, from the primary form], we ought to infer the gender from the diminutive.
xxix. Etymology (De etymologia) 1. Etymology (ety- mologia) is the origin of words, when the force of a verb or a noun is inferred through interpretation. Aris- totle called this oáµßo2ov (sign), and Cicero adnotatio (symbolization), because by presenting their model it makes known (notus) the names and words for things.
For example, flumen ("river") is so called from fluen- dum ("flowing") because it has grown by flowing. 2. The knowledge of a word's etymology often has an indis- pensable usefulness for interpreting the word, for when you have seen whencea word has originated, you under- stand its force more quickly. Indeed, one's insight into anything is clearer when its etymology is known. How- ever, not all words were established by the ancients from nature; some were established by whim, just as we some- times give names to our slaves and possessions accord- ing to what tickles our fancy. 3. Hence it is the case that etymologies are not to be found for all words, because some things received names not according to their innate qualities, but by the caprice of human will.
Etymologies of words are furnished either from their rationale (causa), as 'kings' (rex, gen. regis) from ['ruling' (regendum) and] 'acting correctly' (recte agendum); or from their origin, as 'man' (homo) because he is from 'earth' (humus), or from the contrary, as 'mud' (lutum) from 'washing' (lavare, ppl. lutus), since mud is not clean, and 'grove' (lucus), because, darkened by its shade, it is scarcely 'lit' (lucere). 4. Some are created by deriva- tion from other words, as 'prudent' (prudens) from 'pru- dence' (prudentia); some from the sounds, as 'garrulous' (garrulus) from 'babbling sound' (garrulitas). Some are derived from Greek etymology and have a Latin declen- sion, as 'woods' (silva), 'home' (domus). 5. Other words derive their names from names of places, cities, [or] rivers. In addition, many take their names from the lan- guages of various peoples, so that it is difficult to discern their origin. Indeed, there are many foreign words unfa- miliar to Latin and Greek speakers.
xxx. Glosses (De glossis) 1. 'Gloss' (glossa) receives its name from Greek, with the meaning 'tongue.' Philoso- phers call it adverbum, because it defines the utterance in question by means of one single word (verbum): in one word it declares what a given thing is, as contiscere est tacere ("'to fall still' is 'to be silent'"). 2. Again in (Vergil, Aen. 10.314):
Latus haurit apertum (gouges the exposed flank),
'gouges' (haurit, lit. "drinks") is glossed as 'pierces through' (percutit). And again, as when we gloss 'ter- mination' (terminus) as 'end' (finis), and we interpret 'ravaged' (populatus) to be 'devastated' (vastatus), and in general when we make clear the meaning of one word by means of one other word.
xxxi. Differentiation (De differentiis) A differentia- tion (differentia) is a type of definition, which writers on the liberal arts call 'concerning the same and the differ- ent.' Thus two things, of the kind that are confused with each other because of a certain quality that they have in common, are distinguished by an inferred difference, through which it is understood what each of the two is. For instance, one asks what is the difference between a 'king' and a 'tyrant': we define what each is by applying a differentiation, so that "a king is restrained and temper- ate, but a tyrant is cruel." Thus when the differentiation between these two has been given, then one knows what each of them is. And so on in the same way.
xxxii. Barbarism (De barbarismo) 1. A barbarism (barbarismus) is a word pronounced with a corrupted letter or sound: a corrupted letter, as in floriet (i.e. the incorrect future form of florere, "bloom"), when one ought to say florebit ("will bloom"); a corrupted sound, if the first syllable is lengthened and the middle syllable omitted in words like latebrae ("hiding places"), tene- brae ("shadows"). It is called 'barbarism' from barbarian (barbarus) peoples, since they were ignorant of the purity of the Latin language, for some groups of people, once they had been made Romans, brought to Rome their mistakes in language and customs as well as their wealth.
2. There is this difference between a barbarism and a bor- rowing (barbarolexis), that a barbarism occurs in a Latin word when it is corrupted, but when foreign words are brought into Latin speech, it is called 'borrowing.' Fur- ther, when a fault of language occurs in prose, it is called a barbarism, butwhenitoccursinmeter, it is calledameta- plasm (metaplasmus). 3. In addition, a barbarism can occur in written or spoken language. In written language it occurs in four ways: if someone adds, changes, trans- poses, or removes a letter in a word or syllable. In spoken language it may occur in length, intonation, aspiration, and other ways that will follow. 4.A barbarism by length is made if someone says a short syllable for a long, or a long for a short. A barbarism by intonation, if the accent
is moved to another syllable. By aspiration, if the letter H is added where it should not be, or omitted where it should occur. 5.A barbarism by hiatus, whenever a verse is cut off in speaking before it is completed, or whenever a vowel follows a vowel, as in Musai Aonides. Barbarisms also occur by motacism, [iotacism], and lambdacism. 6. A motacism (motacismus) occurs whenever a vowel fol- lows the letter M, as bonum aurum ("good gold), iustum amicum ("just friend"), and we avoid this fault either by suspending the letter M, or by leaving it out. 7. Iotacism (iotacismus) occurs in words with the sound of the letter iota doubled, as Troia, Maia, where the pronunciation of these letters should be weak, so that they seem to sound like one iota, not two. 8. Lambdacism (labdacismus) hap- pens if two Ls are pronounced instead of one, as Africans do, as in colloquium instead of conloquium, or whenever we pronounce a single L too weakly, or a double L too strongly. This is backwards, for we ought to pronounce a single L strongly and a double L weakly. 9. Conlisio occurs whenever the end of the last syllable is the beginning of the next, as in matertera ("mother's sister"). 
xxxiii. Solecisms(Desoloecismis) 1.A solecism (soloe- cismus) is an unsuitable construction made up of more than one word, just as a barbarism is the corruption of a single word. Thus a solecism is a group of words that are not joined by the correct rule, as if someone were to say inter nobis ("between us," with nobis in the wrong case) instead of inter nos, or date veniam scelerato- rum ("grant forgiveness of sinners") instead of sceleratis ("to sinners"). 2. It is called solecism from the Cilicians, who came from the city Soloe, now called Pompeiopolis; when, while dwelling among other peoples, they mixed their own and other languages incorrectly and incongru- ously, they gave their name to solecism. Whence those who speak like this are said to commit solecisms.
3. Among poets, a solecism is called a schema (schema) whenever it is committed in the verse due to the demands of the meter. But when no such demand is present, it remains a fault of solecism. 4. A solecism occurs in two manners: either in parts of speech, or in accidence. It occurs in parts of speech, if we use one part of speech instead of another, for instance, if we join prepositions to adverbs. It occurs in accidence, that is, in those things that are connected to the parts of speech, as, for exam- ple through qualities, genders and numbers, forms, and cases. Solecism may be committed in all of these, as
Donatus has explained (ed. Keil 4.393). 5. It is commit- ted in many ways besides these, for Lucilius spoke of one hundred kinds of solecisms, all of which anyone who is eager to obey the rules of speaking correctly ought to avoid rather than commit.
xxxiv. Faults (De vitiis) 1. Grammarians call the things that we ought to be wary of when we speak 'faults' (vitium). And these are: barbarism, solecism, acyrol- ogy, cacenphaton, and the rest. 2. A barbarism is the corruption of a single word, [as if someone were to lengthen the third syllable in ignoscere]. 3. A solecism is a faulty construction of words [as if someone were to say inter hominibus ("between men," with hominibus in the wrong case) instead of inter homines]. 4. Acyrol- ogy (acyrologia) is the use of an inappropriate word, as (Lucan, Civil War 2.15):
Let the fearful one hope.
To be strictly correct, however, a fearful one dreads, and does not hope. Also (cf. Vergil, Aen. 5.287):
Gramineo in campo (In a field of grass).
It is correct to refer to a field as 'grassy' (graminosus), not 'made of grass' (gramineus). 5. Cacemphaton is speech which is obscene or sounds disorderly. Obscene as (Vergil, Aen. 1.579):
His animum arrecti dictis (Aroused in their hearts by these words). 
Disorderly, as (Vergil, Aen. 2.27):
iuvat ire et Dorica castra (And it is a pleasure to go to the Doric camps).
For it is poor composition to begin with the same syllable with which the preceding word has ended.
6. Pleonasm (pleonasmos) is the superfluous addition of a single word, as (Vergil, Geo. 2.1):
(So far, the cultivation of fields and the stars of the sky).
For stars are in no other place than in the sky. 7. Peris- sology (perissologia) is the superfluous addition of sev- eral words, as (Deuteronomy 33:6): "Let Ruben live, and not die .. ." - since to live is nothing other than not to die. 8. Macrology (macrologia) is speaking at length, and including unnecessary matters as (Livy, cited in Quin- tilian, Inst. or. 8.3.53): "The legates, not having achieved peace, returned back home whence they had come." 9. A tautology (tautologia) is a repetition of the same thing as (Vergil, Aen. 1.546):
If the fates preserve the man, if he is nourished by the etherial air, and does not yet recline in the cruel shades . . . 
For everything that is repeated has the same theme, but is delivered with a crowd of words. 10. Ellipsis (eclipsis) is a gap in speech, in which necessary words are lacking, as (Vergil, Aen. 4.138):
Whose quiver out of gold . . . , 
for the verb 'was' is lacking.
11. Tapinosis is a lowering, reducing the state of a great subject by words as (Vergil, Aen. 1.118):
Here and there men appear, swimming in the vast whirlpool.
For he uses 'whirlpool' (gurges) instead of 'ocean' (mare).
12. Cacosyntheton is a faulty arrangement of words as (Vergil, Aen. 9.609):
Versaque iuvencum terga fatigamus hasta
(And we goad the flanks of our bullocks with reversed spears). 
13. Amphibolia is ambiguous speech that occurs with the accusative case, as in this answer of Apollo to Pyrrhus (Ennius, Annals 179):
Aio te , Aeacida, Romanos vincere posse
(I say that you, scion of Aeacus, can conquer the Romans - or - I say that the Romans can conquer you, scion of Aeacus).
In this verse it is not clear whom he has designated as the victor. 14. It can also occur due to a distinction that is not clear, as (Vergil, Aen. 1.263):
Bellum ingens geret Italia
(Italy will wage an immense war - or - Immense Italy will wage war).
The distinction is unclear, whether it is 'immense war' or 'immense Italy.' 15. This also occurs due to a common verb, as Deprecatur Cato, calumniatur Cicero, praesto- latur Brutus, dedignatur Antonius ("Cato denounces, Cicero slanders, Brutus expects, Anthony scorns"; or, "Cato is denounced," etc.). In this ambiguity it is not dis- closed whether these people denounce or slander others, or others denounce or slander them. 16. It also occurs with homonyms, in which one word has many mean- ings, such as acies ("edge, keenness, front line"), when you do not add 'of the sword, of the eyes, of the army.'
xxxv. Metaplasm (De metaplasmis) 1. Metaplasm (metaplasmus) in the Greek language is called 'trans- formation' (transformatio) in Latin. It occurs in a single word due to the requirements of meter and to poetic license; its varieties are as follows. 2. Prothesis is an addi- tion to the beginning of a word, as [gnatus, for natus ("born"), tetulit for tulit ("carried")]. Epenthesis is an addition in the middle of the word, as [(Vergil, Aen. 3.409):
Maneant in relligione nepotes
(May the descendants continue in the religious duties),
instead of religione, and relliquias for reliquias ("relics"), induperator for inperator ("ruler")]. 3. Par- agoge is an addition at the end of the word, as [admit- tier (i.e. the archaic middle or passive form) for admitti ("to be admitted"), magis for mage ("more"), and potes- tur for potest ("is able")]. Aphaeresis is an excision from the beginning of the word, as temno for con- temno ("despise"). Syncope (syncope) is an excision from the middle, as forsan for forsitan ("perhaps"). Apocope (apocope) is an excision from the end, as sat for satis ("enough"). 4. Ectasis is an improper lengthening, as [(Vergil, Aen. 1.499):
Exercet Di¯ana choros (Diana oversees the dancers), 
and (Vergil, Aen. 1.2):
I¯taliam fato ( . . . to Italy, by fate . . . ),
while Italiam ought to be said with short syllables.]
Systole is an improper shortening, as [(Vergil, Aen.
6.773):
urbemque Fidenam (and the city of Fidena),
where the first syllable ought to be long (i.e. F´denam). As also when we say Orion with short syllables, when it should be said with lengthened ones]. Diaeresis (diaere- sis) is the splitting of one syllable into two, as [(Vergil, Aen. 9.26):
dives picta¨i vestis (rich with embroidered clothes)
instead of pictae, and (Ennius, Annals 33):
Alba¨i longa¨i (of Alba Longa)
for Albae longae.] 5. Episynaloephe is the slurring of two [syllables] into one, as [Phæthon for Pha¨ethon, Neri for Nere¨i, and æripedem for a¨eripedem].
Synaloepha (synaloephe) is the combining of vowels from adjacent words, as [(Vergil, Aen. 9.1):
Atque ea diversa penitus dum parte geruntur
(And while those things were happening far away)].
6. Ellipsis (eclipsis) is the combining of consonants with vowels as [(Vergil, Aen. 1.3):
Multum ille et terris iactatus et alto
(Much tossed about on lands and sea)].
Antithesis is the substitution of one letter for another, as [inpete for impetu ("with a rush"), olli for illi ("they")]. Metathesis (metathesis) is the transposition of letters, as [Thymbre for Thymber, Evandre for Evander]. 7. Between the barbarism and the figure, that is, a polished Latin utterance, is the metaplasm, whichmay occuras a fault in speech in a single word. Likewise, between the solecism and the schema, that is, a polished construction of words, is the figure, which may become a fault in speech in a group of words. Therefore metaplasms and schemas are midway, and distinguished by skill and by lack of skill. They also are used as ornament.
xxxvi. Schemas (De schematibus) 1. Schemas (schema, plural schemata) are translated from Greek into Latin as 'figures of speech' (eloquium figurae), which occur in words and phrases in various forms of speaking, for the sake of ornamenting speech. While there are many of these according to the grammarians, the following are
met with. 2. Prolepsis (prolempsis) is an anticipation, where those things that ought to follow are placed first, as (Vergil, Aen. 12.161):
Interea reges ingenti mole, Latinus . . . 
(In the meantime, the kings, in mighty pomp, as Latinus . . .).
It ought to say, Interea reges ingenti mole ("In the mean- time, the kings in mighty pomp"), and immediately add what logically follows (12.169), procedunt castris ("pro- ceed to camp"), and then say Latinus . . . , etc. But an anticipation of subject has been made for the sake of ornament, and those things which ought to follow the statement about the kings are interposed for seven verses, and after that 'proceed to camp' is added. It is therefore an anticipation, because what ought to follow is put first.
3. Zeugma (zeugma) is a phrase where several thoughts are encompassed in one word. There are three types, for the word which links the phrases is either placed first, last, or in the middle. Placed first as (Lucilius 139):
Vertitur oenophoris fundus, sententia nobis
(The bottom is inverted by the wineholders, the sentence by us).
In the middle, as (Ennius, Annals 329):
Graecia Sulpicio sorti data, Gallia Cottae
(Greece was given by lot to Sulpicius, Gaul to Cotta).
At the end as in (Terence, Andria 68):
Namque hoc tempore obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit
(For in our times, obsequiousness does friends, and truth does hatred beget).
4. Hypozeuxis is the figure opposite to the one above, where there is a separate phrase for each individual meaning, as (Vergil, Aen. 10.149):
Regem adit et regi memorat nomenque genusque (He approaches the king and tells the king both his name and family).
5. Syllepsis (syllempsis) is the use of an expression com- pleted by a singular verb with dissimilar or plural phrases, as (Vergil, Aen. 1.553):
Sociis et rege recepto
("When companions and king be found"; recepto is singular),
or a singular phrase is supplied with a plural verb, as (Vergil, Ecl. 1.80):
Sunt nobis mitia poma,
. . . et pressi copia lactis
(There are for us ripe fruits, . . . and an abundance of cheese).
For he said sunt ("are") above. He ought to say this: est et pressi copia lactis ("and there is an abundance of cheese").
6. Syllepsis occurs not only with parts of speech, but also with things incidental to the parts of speech. Where one is used for many, and many for one, that is syllepsis. One for many, as this (Vergil, Aen. 2.20):
And they fill the belly with an armed soldier,
when the Trojan horse was not filled with one soldier, but many. And again, many for one as in the Gospel (Matthew 27:44): "The thieves, that were crucified with him, reproached him," where instead of merely the one, both of them are represented as having blasphemed.
7. Anadiplosis (anadiplosis) occurs when a following verse begins with the same word that ended the previous verse, as in this (Vergil, Ecl. 8.55):
Certent et cygnis ululae, sit Tityrus Orpheus,
Orpheus in silvis, inter delphinas Arion
(And let the screech-owls compete with the swans, let Tityrus be Orpheus, an Orpheus in the woods, an Arion among the dolphins).
8. Anaphora (anaphora) is the repetition of the same word at the beginning of several verses, as (Vergil, Aen. 3.157):
Nos te Dardania incensa tuaque arma secuti, nos tumidum sub te permensi classibus aequor
(We followed you and your troops from burning Dardania, we traversed the swollen sea in a fleet under your command).
9. Epanaphora is the repetition of a word at the beginning of each phrase in a single verse, as (Vergil, Aen. 7.759):
Te nemus Anguitiae, vitrea te Focinus unda, te liquidi flevere lacus
(For you the forest of Anguitia wept, for you Lake Fucinus with its glassy wave, for you the clear lakes).
10. Epizeuxis is a doubling of words with a single sense, as (Vergil, Aen. 4.660):
Sic, sic iuvat ire per umbras
(Thus, thus it is a joyful thing to go through the shades).
11. Epanalepsis is a repetition of the same word at the beginning and end of the verse, as in this (Juvenal, Satires 14.139):
Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit
(The love of money grows as wealth itself grows).
12. Paronomasia (paronomasia) is the use of nearly the same word with a different meaning, as in this: Abire an obire te convenit? ("Are you to pass on or to pass away?"), that is, 'to become an exile' or 'to die.' 13. Schesis onomaton is a group of linked nouns, joined in a kind of parade, as (cf. Lucretius, On the Nature of Things 5.1192):
Nubila, nix, grando, procellae, fulmina, venti
(Clouds, snow, hail, tempests, lightning, winds).
14. Alliteration (paromoeon) is a group of words begin- ning with the same letter; such a sort is found in Ennius (Annals 109):
O Tite tute Tati tibi tanta tyranne tulisti
(O Titus Tatius, you tyrant, you yourself have brought such things on yourself).
But Vergil moderates this well, when he uses this figure not through the entire verse, like Ennius, but sometimes only at the beginning of a verse, as in this (Aen. 1.295):
Saeva sedens super arma (Sitting over his savage weapons),
and at other times at the end, as (Aen. 3.183):
Sola mihi tales casus Cassandra canebat
(Cassandra alone foretold to me such calamities).
15. Homoeoptoton occurs when many words in the same grammatical case are used, as in this (Vergil, Aen. 12.903):
Sed neque currentem, sed nec cognoscit euntem, tollentemque manu saxumque inmane moventem (But he does not know (himself) while running or
walking, and lifting and moving the huge rock with his hand).
16. Homoeoteleuton (homoeon teleuton) occurs when several verbs terminate in the same way, as (Cicero, Against Catiline 2.1): abiit, abcessit, evasit, erupit ("he left, he walked off, he escaped, he burst forth"). 17. Polypto- ton (polyptoton) occurs when a sentence is varied with different grammatical cases, as (Persius, Satires 3.84):
Ex nihilo nihilum, ad nihilum nil posse reverti (Nothing from nothing, nothing can be returned to nothing)
and (Persius, Satires 5.79):
Marci Dama. - Papae! -Marco spondente, recusas? . . . Marcus dixit. - Ita est. - Adsigna, Marce, tabellas. (Marcus Dama: What? although Marcus stands surety, do you refuse?... Marcus has said it, it must be so. Make out the tablets, Marcus.) 
18. Hirmos is a phrase of continuous speech reserving its sense until the very end as in (Vergil, Aen. 1.159):
Est in secessu longo locus, insula portum . . . 
(There is a place in a long inlet, an island (making) a harbor . . . ),
and so on. Here the sense proceeds at length up to this point (1.165):
Horrentique atrum nemus inminet umbris
(A black grove looms with bristling shade). 
19. Polysyndeton (polysyntheton) is a passage linked by many conjunctions, as (Vergil, Geo. 3.344):
Tectumque, laremque, armaque, Amicleumque canem
(the house and the Lares and the weapons and the Amiclean dog).
20. Dialyton, or asyndeton (asyntheton), is a figure that is composed in the opposite way, simply and freely without conjunctions, as venimus, vidimus, placuit ("we came, we saw, it was good"). 21. Antithesis (antitheton) occurs where opposites are placed against each other and bring beauty to the sentence, as this (Ovid, Met. 1.19):
Frigida pugnabant calidis, humentia siccis: mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus
(Cold things battled with hot ones, moist with dry, soft with hard, those having weight with the weightless).
22. Hypallage occurs whenever words are taken in the opposite way as (Vergil, Aen. 3.61):
Dare classibus Austros (Give the east wind to the fleet),
when we should give the ships to the winds, not the winds to the ships.
xxxvii. Tropes (De tropis) 1. The grammarians des- ignate tropes (tropus) with a Greek name; they are
translated into Latin as 'modes of speech' (modus locu- tionum). They shift from their proper meaning to a sim- ilar sense that is less strict. It is most difficult to record the names of all of them, but Donatus has written down thirteen to be handed down for use (ed. Keil 4.399-402).
2. Metaphor (metaphora) is an adopted transference of some word, as when we say "cornfields ripple," "the vines put forth gems," although we do not find waves and gems in these things; in these phrases, terms have been transferred from elsewhere. But these expressions, and others that also use tropes, are veiled in figural garb with respect to what should be understood, so that they may exercise the reader's understanding, and lest the subjects grow common from being stripped bare and obvious. 3. And metaphors occur in four ways: from animate to animate, as (anon., Courtney fr. 6):
He mounted winged horses;
speaking metaphorically it associates the wings of a bird with a quadruped. Also (Vergil, Ecl. 6.80):
With what running (i.e. with what flight) she (i.e. Philomela transformed into a bird) sought deserted places;
this associates the running of a quadruped with a winged creature. From the inanimate to the inanimate, as (anon., Courtney fr. 4):
The pine-wood plows the sea, the lofty keel cuts a furrow;
this associates the use of land with water, since plowing and cutting a furrow have to do with the land, not the sea.
4. From inanimate to animate, as "blooming youth"; this associates inanimate flowers with youth, which is living. From animate to inanimate, as (anon., Courtney fr. 5; cited from Augustine, Christian Doctrine 3.7.11):
You, father Neptune, whose white temples, wreathed with crashing brine, resound; to whom the great Ocean flows forth as your eternal beard, and in whose hair rivers wander.
For 'beard,' 'temples,' and 'hair' pertain not to the Ocean but to men. 5. In this way, some terms for things are transferred very elegantly from one kind to another for
the sake of beauty, so that the speech may be greatly adorned. Metaphor is either of one direction, as 'the cornfields are rippling' - for you cannot say 'the ripples are cornfielding'- or it is an antistropha, that is recipro- cal, as remigium alarum ("oarage of wings"; Vergil, Aen. 6.19). We can speak of both wings (i.e. oars) of ships and oarages (i.e. beatings) of wings.
6. Catachresis (catachresis) is a name applied to an unrelated thing. And this differs from a metaphor in that metaphor enlarges on something having a name, while catachresis makes use of an unrelated name because it does not have one of its own; as (Vergil, Geo. 2.131):
And most similar to a laurel with respect to its (i.e. a tree's) face,
and (Vergil, Aen. 5.157):
. . . Centaur (i.e. a ship's name); now the two are carried as one with brows (i.e. bows) united, and they plow the salt seas with long keels.
Now a 'face' and a 'brow' pertain only to animals and men. And if the poet had not applied this name to a ship, he would not have had a word that he could use which was appropriate for that part.
7. Metalepsis (metalempsis) is a trope designating what follows from what precedes it, as (Persius, Satires 3.11):
The hand of this sheet came, and a knotty reed pen.
For by 'hand,' words are meant, and by 'reed pen,' letters are meant.
8. Metonymy (metonymia) is a designation (transnominatio) that is transferred from one meaning to another similar meaning. It is made in many ways. For instance, it expresses what is contained by what contains, as "the theater applauds," "the meadows low," when in the first instance people applaud and in the second, cows low. In the opposite way, it also expresses that which contains by that which is contained, as (Vergil, Aen. 2.311):
Now the nearby Ucalegon burns,
when it is not Ucalegon (i.e. a Trojan citizen), but his house, that burns. 9. Also, it expresses what has been discovered by the discoverer, as (Terence, Eunuch 732);
Without Ceres and Liber, Venus grows cold,
and (Vergil, Aen. 9.76):
Vulcan sends mingled embers to the stars.
For by Ceres, the discoverer of grain, he means "bread"; by Liber, the discoverer of the vine, "wine"; by Venus, "desire"; and by Vulcan, "fire." In the opposite way, it expresses the discoverer by the discovery as (Plautus, fr. 159):
We pray to wine (for the god is present here),
inplace of 'Liber,' who, according to the Greeks, invented wine. 10. Also, metonymy expresses that which is caused by its cause, as 'sluggish cold,' because it makes people sluggish, and 'pale fear,' since it makes people pale. In the opposite way, it expresses the cause by that which is caused, as (cf. Vergil, Aen. 5.817):
The father yokes the horses and puts foaming bits made of gold on them, spirited as they are.
He said 'foaming bits,' although they themselves cer- tainly do not make foam, but rather the horse that wears them sprinkles them with scattered foam.
11. Antonomasia (antonomasia) is a trope applied for a name, that is, instead of a name, as 'begotten of Maia' for Mercury. This trope occurs in three manners: from the spirit, as (Vergil, Aen. 5.407):
And the large-souled son of Anchises;
from the body as (Vergil, Aen. 3.619):
That lofty one;
from something extrinsic, as (Vergil, Aen. 1.475):
Unlucky boy, no match for Achilles when he met him.
12. An epithet (epitheton) is in addition to the name, for it is placed before its noun, as 'bountiful Ceres,' and (Vergil, Geo. 1.470):
Unclean dogs and ominous birds.
There is this difference between antonomasia and an epithet, that antonomasia is used in place of a name, while an epithet is never used without the name. With these two tropes we may revile someone, or describe him, or praise him.
13. Synecdoche (synecdoche) is the conceit by which the whole is understood from the part, or the part from the whole. With it a genus is designated by its species, and a species by its genus [while species is the part and genus is the whole]. The part is understood from the whole, as in (Vergil, Aen. 6.311):
As many as the birds that flock together, when the frigid year chases them to sea.
Indeed, it is not the whole of year that is frigid, but only part of the year, that is, winter. In the opposite way, the whole is designated by the part, as (Vergil, Aen. 2.256):
When the royal helm had raised the torches,
when it is not merely the helm, but the ship, and not the ship, but those in the ship, and not all of those in the ship, but a single one who brings forth the torches.
14. Onomatopoeia (onomatopoeia) is a word fash- ioned to imitate the sound of jumbled noise as the stri- dor ("creaking") of hinges, the hinnitus ("whinnying") of horses, the mugitus ("lowing") of cows, the balatus ("bleating") of sheep. 15. Periphrasis (periphrasis) is a circumlocution (circumloquium), when a single topic is expressed with many words, as (Vergil, Aen. 1.387):
He plucks the vital airs.
A single meaning is expressed by this combination of words, that is, "he lives." This trope is twofold, for either it splendidly brings forth the truth, or it avoids foulness by indirection. It splendidly brings forth the truth in (Vergil, Aen. 4.584 and 9.459):
And now, early Aurora was scattering new light on the earth, leaving the saffron bed of Tithonus.
He means, "now it grew light," or, "it was daybreak." It avoids foulness by indirection, as in (cf. Vergil, Aen. 8.405):
And he sought what was pleasing, relaxed in his wife's embrace.
By this indirection he avoids obscenity, and decently expresses the act of sexual intercourse.
16. Hyperbaton (hyperbaton) is a transposition (tran- scensio), when a word or sentence is changed in its order. There are five types of this: anastrophe, hysteron pro- teron, parenthesis, tmesis, and synthesis. Anastrophe is a reversed order of words as litora circum ("the shores around"; Vergil, Aen. 3.75), instead of circum litora. 17. Hysteron proteron (hysteron proteron) is a sentence with the order changed, as (Vergil, Aen. 3.662):
Then he touched the deep waves, and came to the water.
For he came to the water first, and thus touched the waves. 18. Parenthesis (parenthesis) occurs when we
interrupt our sentence, so that the sentence remains entire when this interruption is removed from the mid- dle, as (Vergil Aen. 1.643):
Aeneas - for his paternal love could not permit his mind to rest - quickly sends Achates to the ships.
[For this is the order: "Aeneas quickly sends Achates."] And that which intervenes is the parenthesis. 19. Tmesis (tmesis) is a division of one word by the interposition of other words, as (cf. Vergil, Aen. 1.412):
Multum nebulae circum dea fudit amictum
(The goddess surrounded (them) with a thick mantle of mist),
instead of circumfudit. 20. Synthesis (synthesis) occurs when words from every part of the thought are jumbled up, as in this (cf. Vergil, Aen. 2.348):
Iuvenes, fortissima frustra pectora, si vobis audendi extrema cupido est certa sequi, quae sit rebus fortuna videtis.
Excessere omnes aditis arisque relictis
dii, quibus inperium hoc steterat; succurritis urbi incensae; moriamur et in media arma ruamus.
(Young men, in vain your stout hearts; if your desire for daring the final battle is fixed on following me, you see what the outcome of the matter will be. They have all left the abandoned shrines and altars, the gods on whom this empire was established; you are helping a burning city; let us die and rush into the midst of the fray).
For the order is like this: "Young men with stout hearts, in vain you would be helping a burning city, because the gods have left. So if you firmly wish to follow me as I attempt a final battle, let us rush into the midst of the fray and die." 21. Hyperbole (hyperbole) is a loftiness that exceeds credibility, beyond what can be believed, as (Vergil, Aen. 3.423):
She strikes the stars with a wave,
and (Vergil, Aen. 1.107):
It lays open the sea bottom between the waves.
In this way something is magnified beyond belief; yet it does not stray from the path of expressing truth, even though the words go beyond what is referred to, so that the intention may seem to be of one speaking, not of one deceiving. By this trope something may not only be mag- nified, but also diminished. Magnified as in 'faster than
the East Wind'; diminished as in 'softer than a feather,' 'harder than a rock.'
22. Allegory (allegoria) is 'other-speech' (alienilo- quium), for it literally says one thing, and another thing is understood, as in (Vergil, Aen. 1.184):
He saw three stags wandering on the shore,
where either the three leaders of the Punic wars are meant, or the three Punic wars themselves. Also in the Bucolics (Ecl. 3.71):
I have sent ten golden apples,
that is, ten pastoral eclogues to Augustus. This trope has many types, seven of which stand out: irony, antiphrasis, riddle, charientismos, paroemia, sarcasm, astysmos.
23. Irony (ironia) is an expression wherein by one's tone of voice the meaning is understood as the contrary. Thus with this trope something is said cleverly as an accusation or as an insult, as in this (Vergil, Aen. 1.140):
Your home, East wind; let Aeolus take pride in that palace, and rule in that closed prison of winds.
And yet in what way is it a palace, if it is a prison? This is answered by the tone of voice, for the normal tone of voice applies to 'prison' and the irony is in 'take pride in' and 'palace.' And so, by a different tone of voice, the entire thing is made known through a display of irony, by which one derides by praising.
24. Antiphrasis (antiphrasis) is a term to be under- stood from its opposite, as 'grove' (lucus) because it lacks light (lux, gen. lucis), due to the excessive shade of the forest; and 'ghosts' (manes, from old Latin mani, "benev- olent ones"), that is, 'mild ones' - although they are actually pitiless - and 'moderate ones' - although they are terrifying and savage (immanes); and the Parcae and Eumenides (lit. in Greek "the gracious ones"), that is, the Furies, because they spare (parcere) and are gracious to no one. By this trope also people call dwarves by Atlas's name, and call the blind 'the seers,' and commonly, call Ethiopians 'the silver ones.' 25. Between irony and antiphrasis there is this difference: that irony expresses what one intends to be understood through the tone of voice alone, as when we say to someone doing every- thing poorly, "You're doing a good job," while antiphrasis
signifies the contrary not through the tone of voice, but only through its words, whose source has the opposite meaning.
26. A riddle (aenigma) is an obscure question that is difficult to solve unless it is explained, as this (Judges 14:14): "Out of the eater came forth food, and out of the strong came forth sweetness," meaning that a hon- eycomb was taken from the mouth of a (dead) lion. Between allegory and the riddle there is this difference, that the force of allegory is twofold and figuratively indi- cates one subject under the guise of other subjects, while a riddle merely has an obscure meaning, and its solution is hinted at through certain images.
27. Charientismos is a trope by which harsh things are made more pleasing in speech, as when someone ask- ing, "Has anyone missed us?" is answered, "Good For- tune missed you." From this it is understood that no one has missed us. 28. Paroemia is a proverb appropriate to the subject or situation. To the subject, as in, "You kick against the pricks," when resisting adversity is meant. To the situation, as in "the wolf in the story": peasants say that a person would lose his voice if he saw a wolf in front of him. Thus the proverb, "the wolf in the story," is said to someone who suddenly falls silent. 29. Sarcasm (sar- casmos) is hostile ridicule with bitterness, as (cf. Vergil, Aen. 2.547):
Therefore you will report these things, and you will go as a messenger of my father to the son of Peleus; remember to tell him of my sorry deeds and that Neoptolemus is degenerate. 
30. The opposite of this is astysmos, pleasantry without anger, as in this (Vergil, Ecl. 3.90):
Whoever does not hate Bavius, may he love your songs,
Maevius, and may he likewise yoke foxes and milk billy-goats.
That is, whoever does not hate Bavius is doomed to like Maevius - for Maevius and Bavius were terrible poets, and Vergil's enemies. Therefore, whoever loves them would do things contrary to nature, that is, he would yoke foxes and milk billy-goats.
31. Homoeosis, which is translated in Latin as simil- itude (similitudo), is that by which the description of some less known thing is made clear by something better known which is similar to it. There are three types: icon, parabola, and paradigm, that is, image, comparison, and
model. 32. Icon (icon, cf. ?"mÛv, "image") is an image (imago), when we attempt to explain the shape of a thing from a similar kind as (Vergil, Aen. 4.558):
Similar to Mercury in all respects: in voice and color and blonde hair and graceful youthful limbs.
Thus similarity with regard to appearance is fitting for the one whose character is introduced. 33. Parabola (parabola) is a comparison (comparatio) from dissim- ilar things, as (Lucan, Civil War 1.205):
Like a lion seen hard by in the fields of heat-bearing Libya, he beset the enemy,
where he compares Caesar to a lion, making a com- parison, not from his own kind, but from another. 34. Paradigm (paradigma) is a model (exemplum) of some- one's word or deed, or something that is appropriate to the thing that we describe either from its similar or from its dissimilar nature, thus: "Scipio perished at Hippo as bravely as did Cato at Utica."
35. A comparison (similitudo) may be made in three ways: from an equal, from a greater, from a lesser. From an equal (Vergil, Aen. 1.148):
And just as often when rebellion has broken out in a great populace.
From a greater to a lesser (Lucan, Civil War 1.151):
Just as lightning is forced down by the winds through the clouds.
And from a lesser to a greater (Vergil, Aen. 6.119):
If Orpheus could summon the spirit of his wife, relying on a Thracian cithara and its melodious strings,
as if he meant, relying on a small unimportant object; that is, if he relies on a cithara, I rely on my piety.
xxxviii. Prose (De prosa) 1. Prose (prosa) is an extended discourse, unconstrained by rules of meter. The ancients used to say that prose is extended (pro- ductus) and straightforward (rectus). Whence Varro in his work on Plautus says that prosis lectis (read as prose) means 'straightforwardly,' and thus a discourse that is not inflected by meter, but is straightforward, is called prose in that it extends (producere) directly. Others say that prose is so called because it is profuse (profusus), or because it 'rushes forth' (proruere) and runs expan- sively with no set limit to it. 2. Moreover, for the Greeks
as well as the Romans, the interest in poems was far more ancient than in prose, for at first all things used to be set in verse, and enthusiasm for prose flourished later. Among the Greeks, Pherecydes of Syros was first to write with unmetered speech, and among the Romans, Appius Caecus, in his oration against Pyrrhus, was first to use unmetered speech. Straightway after this, others competed by means of eloquence in prose.
xxxix. Meters (De metris) 1. Meters (metrum) are so called because they are bounded by the fixed measures (mensura) and intervals of feet, and they do not proceed beyond the designated dimension of time - for measure is called µstpov in Greek. 2. Verses are so called because when they are arranged in their regular order into feet they are governed within a fixed limit through segments that are called caesurae (caesum) and members (mem- brum). Lest these segments roll on longer than good judgment could sustain, reason has established a mea- sure from which the verse should be turned back; from this 'verse' (versus) itself is named, because it is turned back (revertere, ppl. reversus). 3. And related to this is rhythm (rhythmus), which is not governed by a specific limit, but nevertheless proceeds regularly with ordered feet. In Latin this is called none other than 'number' (numerus), regarding which is this (Vergil, Ecl. 9.45):
I recall the numbers (numerus), if I could grasp the words!
4. Whatever has metric feet is called a 'poem' (carmen). People suppose that the name was given to it either because it was pronounced 'in pieces' (carptim), just as today we say that wool that the scourers tear in pieces is carded (carminare), or because they used to think that people who sang those poems had lost (carere) their minds.
5. Meters are named either after their feet, or after the topics about which they are written, or after their inven- tors, or after those who commonly use them, or after the number of syllables. 6. Meters named after feet are, for example, dactylic, iambic, trochaic, for trochaic meter is constructed from the trochee, dactylic from the dactyl, and others similarly from their feet. Meters are named after number, as hexameter, pentameter, trimeter - as
we name one kind of verse senarius (i.e. 'of six') from the number of feet. But the Greeks call them trime- ters, because they pair them. Ennius is said to be the first to have written Latin hexameters; people call them 'long' verses. 7. Meters are said to be named for their inventors, as Anacreontic, Sapphic, Archilochian. Thus Anacreon composed Anacreontic meters, the woman Sappho published Sapphic meters, a certain Archilochus wrote Archilochian meters, and a certain Colopho- nian practiced Colophonian meters. And the deviser of Sotadean meters is Sotades, a Cretan by family. And the lyric poet Simonides composed Simonidian meters.
8. Meters are named for those commonly using them, as, for example, Asclepiadian meters. Now Aesclepius did not invent them, but they were named thus from his time on because he used them most elegantly [and most often]. 9. Meters are named for the topics about which they are written, as heroic, elegiac, bucolic. For instance, a poem is called heroic (heroicus) because the acts and deeds of strong men are recounted in it, for celes- tial (aerius) men, as it were, worthy of the skies because of their wisdom and strength, are called heroes (heros). This meter (i.e. dactylic hexameter) takes precedence over the others in importance. It alone of all the meters is suited for great works as much as for small, equally capable of smoothness and sweetness. 10. On account of these powers, it alone receives this name, as it is called 'heroic' so that the deeds of heroes will be remembered. It is considered the simplest of all meters, and is com- posed using two feet, the dactyl and the spondee. It often consists almost entirely of either the former or the latter, except that the most well balanced verse is made with a mixture of both rather than being formed by a single type of foot.
11. The heroic is also the earliest of all meters. Moses is shown to have composed this meter first in his song in Deuteronomy (Deuteronomy 32-33) long before Phere- cydes and Homer. Whence it appears that the prac- tice of poetry is more ancient among the Hebrews than among the pagans, seeing that Job, a contemporary of Moses, also took up hexameter verse, with its dactyl and spondee. 12. Achatesius of Miletus is said to have been first among the Greeks to compose this, or, as others sup-
pose, Pherecydes of Syros. This meter was called Pythian before Homer, and after Homer was called heroic. 13. People choose to call it Pythian because the oracles of Apollo were proclaimed in this kind of meter. When he attacked the serpent Python with arrows on Parnassus, to avenge his mother, the dwellers at Delphi cheered him on with this meter, saying, as Terentianus has it (On Meter 1591): ["? pat?v, "? pat?v, "? pat?v].
14. The 'elegiac' (elegiacus) meter is so called because the measure of this particular song is suited for mourn- ful subjects. Terentianus (On Meter 1799) used to call those meters 'elegiacs' because such a rhythmic closure, as they say, is more suited to sorrowful modes. 15. But by whom this was invented there is hardly any agreement, except that Ennius was the first among us Latin speakers to use it. Moreover, a dispute among the grammarians continues to this day about who was first among Greeks, so it may be set aside as a matter sub iudice. Some of them claim a certain Colophonian as the inventor and author, and some of them Archilochus.
16. And many people believe the bucolic (bucolicus), that is, the pastoral (pastoralis) poem, was first composed by shepherds in Syracuse, and some believe by shepherds in Sparta. As Xerxes, king of the Persians, crossed into Thrace, and the Spartan maidens, in fear of the enemy, neither left the city nor performed the solemn procession and rustic dance of Diana according to custom, a crowd of shepherds celebrated this with artless songs, lest the religious observance should pass unmarked. And it is called bucolic for the most part, although speeches and songs of the shepherds and goatherds are contained in it. 
17. It is clear that David the prophet first composed and sang hymns (hymnus) in praise of God. Then, among the pagans, Memmia Timothoe - who lived in the time of Ennius, long after David - first made hymns to Apollo and the Muses. 'Hymns' are translated from Greek into Latin as "praises" (laudes). 18. Epithalamiums (epitha- lamium) are wedding songs, which are sung by rhetori- cians in honor of the bride and groom. Solomon first composed these in praise of the church and of Christ (i.e. the Song of Songs). From him the pagans appro- priated the epithalamium for themselves, and a song of this type was taken up. This kind of song was first per- formed by pagans on the stage, and later was associated only with weddings. It is called epithalamium because it is sung in bedchambers (thalamus).
19. Jeremiah first composed the threnody (threnos), which is called 'lament' (lamentum) in Latin, in a poem on the city of Jerusalem [when it was destroyed] and on the people [Israel] when they [were destroyed and] were led captive. After this, among the Greeks, Simonides the lyric poet was first. It was associated with funerals and laments, as it is today. 20. 'Epitaph' (epitaphium) in Greek is translated in Latin as "over the grave" (supra tumulum), for it is an inscription about the dead, which is made over the repose of those who are now dead. Their life, conduct, and age are written there. 21.A work consisting of many books is called a poesis by its Greek name; a poem (poema) is a work of one book, an idyll (idyllion), a work of few verses, a distich (distichon) of two verses, and a monostich (monostichon) of one verse.
22. An epigram (epigramma) is an inscription, which is translated into Latin as "a writing upon something" (superscriptio), for sp(c) is translated as "upon" (super) and ?p?µµa as "letter" or "writing" (scriptio). 23. An epode (epodon) is a short 'concluding passage' (clausula) in a poem. It is called epode because it is sung after the manner of elegiac verse, whichconsists of a longer line set down first, and then another, shorter, line. The shorter ones that follow each of the longer are used as a refrain, as if they were clausulae. 24. The lyric poets speak of clausulae as cutoff verses substituted for whole verses, as with Horace (Epodes 2.1):
Beatus ille, qui procul negotiis
(O happy he who, far from busyness),
and then a cutoff verse follows:
Ut prisca gens mortalium
(Like the first race of mortals),
and thus alternate verses in succession lack some part: similar to the verse preceding, but shorter (i.e. iambic trimeters alternate with iambic dimeters).
25. The grammarians are accustomed to call those poems 'centos' (cento) which piece together their own particular work in a patchwork (centonarius) manner from poems of Homer and Vergil, making a single poem out of many scattered passages previously composed, based on the possibilities offered by each source. 26. In fact, Proba, wife of Adelphus, copied a very full cento from Vergil on the creation of the world and the Gospels (i.e. Cento Probae), with its subject matter composed in accordance with Vergil's verses, and the verses fitted together in accordance with her subject matter. Thus
also a certain Pomponius, among other compositions of his leisure hours, written in his own style, composed his Tityrus out of this same poet, in honor of Christ; likewise he composed a cento from the Aeneid.
xl. The fable (De fabula) 1. Poets named 'fables' (fab- ula) from 'speaking' (fari), because they are not actual events that took place, but were only invented in words. These are presented with the intention that the conversa- tion of imaginary dumb animals among themselves may be recognized as a certain image of the life of humans. Alcmeon of Croton is said to have been the first to invent these, and they are called Aesopian, because among the Phrygians, Aesop was accomplished in this area. 2. And there are both Aesopian fables and Libystican fables. They are Aesopian fables when dumb animals, or inan- imate things such as cities, trees, mountains, rocks, and rivers, are imagined to converse among themselves. But they are Libystican fables when humans are imagined as conversing with animals, or animals with humans. 3. Poets have made up some fables for the sake of entertain- ment, and expounded others as having to do with the nature of things, and still others as about human morals. Those made up for the sake of entertainment are such as are commonly told, or that kind that Plautus and Terence composed. 4. People make up fables about the nature of things, like 'crooked-limbed Vulcan,' because by nature fire is never straight, and like the animal with three shapes (Lucretius On the Nature of Things 5.905):
A lion in front, a dragon in the rear, and in the middle, the Chimaera itself,
that is, a she-goat. With this, people intend to dis- tinguish the ages of man: the first, adolescence, is fero- cious and bristling, like a lion; the midpart of life is the most lucid, like a she-goat, because she sees most acutely; then comes old age with its crooked happenstances - the dragon. 5. Thus also the fable of the Hippocentaur, that is, a human being mixed with a horse, was invented to express the speedy course of human life, because it is known that a horse is very fast.
6. Then there are fables with a moral, as in Horace a mouse speaks to a mouse, and a weasel to a little fox, so that through an imaginary story a true meaning may be applied to the story's action. Whence also Aesop's fables are the kind told for the purpose of a moral, just as in the book of Judges (9:8) the trees seek a king for themselves and speak to the olive tree, the fig tree, the grape vine, and the bramble-bush. The whole story is made up especially for the moral, so that we arrive at the matter that is intended with the true meaning, though, to be sure, by means of a made-up narrative. 7. Thus the orator Demosthenes used a fable against Philip: when Philip had ordered the Athenians to give him ten orators, and only then would he depart, Demosthenes invented a fable by which he dissuaded the Athenians from yield- ing. He said that once upon a time wolves persuaded shepherds whose attentiveness they wished to lull that they should meet in friendship - but with the condition that the shepherds would duly hand over their dogs, which were a cause of strife, to the wolves. The shep- herds agreed to this and in the hope of security handed over their dogs, who had kept the most vigilant watch over their sheep. Then the wolves, since the source of their fear had been removed, tore to pieces all that were in the shepherds' herds, not only to satisfy their hunger, but also their wantonness. He said that Philip also was making a demand of the leaders of the people so that he might the more easily oppress a city deprived of its protectors.
xli. History (De historia) 1.A history (historia) is a nar- ration of deeds accomplished; through it what occurred in the past is sorted out. History is so called from the Greek term ¬otop?±v ("inquire, observe"), that is, from 'seeing' or from 'knowing.' Indeed, among the ancients no one would write a history unless he had been present and had seen what was to be written down, for we grasp with our eyes things that occur better than what we gather with our hearing, 2. since what is seen is revealed without falsehood. This discipline has to do with Gram- mar, because whatever is worthy of remembrance is committed to writing. And for this reason, histories are called 'monuments' (monumentum), because they grant
a remembrance (memoria) of deeds that have been done. A series (series) is so called by an analogy with a garland (serta) of flowers tied together one after the other.
xlii. The first authors of histories (De primis auc- toribus historiarum) 1. Among us Christians Moses was the first to write a history, on creation. But among the pagans, Dares the Phrygian was first to publish a history, on the Greeks and Trojans, which they say he wrote on palm leaves. 2. After Dares, Herodotus is held as the first to write history in Greece. After him Phere- cydes was renowned, at the time when Ezra wrote the law.
xliii. The utility of history (De utilitate historiae) His- tories of peoples are no impediment to those who wish to read useful works, for many wise people have imparted the past deeds of humankind in histories for the instruc- tion of the living. Through history they handle a final reckoning back through seasons and years, and they investigate many indispensable matters through the suc- cession of consuls and kings.
xliv. The kinds of history (De generibus historiae) 1. There are three kinds of history. The events of a single day are called an 'ephemeris' (ephemeris); we call this a 'diary' (diarium). What the Romans call 'daily' (diurnus), the Greeks call ephemeris. 2. Histories that are distributed into individual months are called 'calendars' (kalendar- ium). 3. Annals (annales) are the actions of individual years (annus), for whatever domestic or military matters, on sea or land, worthy of memory are treated year by year in records they called 'annals' from yearly (anniversar- ius) deeds. 4. But history (historia) concerns itself with many years or ages, and through the diligence of his- tory annual records are reported in books. There is this difference between history and annals, namely, that his- tory is of those times that we have seen, but annals are of those years that our age has not known. Whence Sal- lust consists of history, and Livy, Eusebius, and Jerome of annals and history. 5. And history, 'plausible narra- tion' (argumentum), and fable differ from one other. Histories are true deeds that have happened, plausible narrations are things that, even if they have not hap- pened, nevertheless could happen, and fables are things that have not happened and cannot happen, because they are contrary to nature.
