i. The earth (De terra) 1. The earth is placed in the central region of the world, standing fast in the center equidistant from all other parts of the sky. In the singu- lar the word 'earth' (terra) signifies the whole globe, but in the plural, distinct parts. Logic supplies the earth's diverse names, for the word terra is derived from the upper surface that is worn away (terere); soil (humus) from the lower, or moist (humidus) earth, like that under the sea; ground (tellus), because we carry away (tollere) what it produces; as such it is also called Ops (i.e. the earth-goddess of plenty) because it produces wealth (ops) from its crops; and also 'arable land' (arvum), from plowing (arare) and cultivating. 2. However, to distin- guish it properly from water, earth is called 'dry land' (aridum), as Scripture says (cf. Genesis 1:10): "God called thedryland(aridus) Earth." The earth's natural attribute is that of dryness, for if it is moist, that comes from a union with water. Of its motion some say that it is the wind in its hollows that, itself moved, moves the earth. Sallust (Histories 2.28): "A number of mountains and hills subsided, sundered by the wind rushing through the hollows of the earth." 3. Others maintain that life- giving water moves in the earth and simultaneously shakes it, like a vessel, as for instance Lucretius (see On the Nature of Things 6.555). Yet others are of the opin- ion that the earth is opoyyo?t6?ç ("spongy"), and that its mostly hidden, collapsing interior shakes everything placed upon it. Also, an opening in the earth is created through the movement of water in the lower regions, or through repeated thunder, or through winds that erupt from cavities of the earth.
ii. The globe (De orbe) 1. The globe (orbis) derives its name from the roundness of the circle, because it resem- bles a wheel; hence a small wheel is called a 'small disk' (orbiculus). Indeed, the Ocean that flows around it on all sides encompasses its furthest reaches in a circle. It
is divided into three parts, one of which is called Asia, the second Europe, the third Africa. 2. The ancients did not divide the three parts of the globe equally, for Asia extends from south to north in the east, but Europe from the north to the west, Africa from the west to the south.
3. Whence it is clear that two of them, Europe and Africa, occupy half of the globe, Asia the other half by itself. But the former pair are divided into two regions, because from the Ocean the Mediterranean enters in between them and separates them. Wherefore, if you divide the globe into two parts, the east and the west, Asia will be in one, Europe and Africa in the other.
iii. Asia (De Asia) 1. Asia (Asia) is named after a certain woman who, according to the ancients, had an empire in the east. It lies in a third sector of the globe, bounded in the east by the rising sun, in the south by the Ocean, in the west by the Mediterranean, in the north by Lake Moeotis (i.e. the Sea of Azov) and the river Tanais (i.e. the Don). It has many provinces and regions, whose names and locations I will briefly explain, beginning with Paradise.
2. Paradise is located inthe east. Its name, translated from Greek into Latin, means "garden." In Hebrew in turn it is called Eden, which in our language means "delights." The combination of both names gives us the expression "garden of delights," for every kind of fruit-tree and non-fruit bearing tree is found in this place, including the tree of life. It does not grow cold or hot there, but the air is always temperate. 3.A spring which bursts forth in the center irrigates the whole grove and it is divided into the headwaters of four rivers. Access to this location was blocked off after the fall of humankind, for it is fenced in on all sides by a flaming sword, that is, encircled by a wall of fire, so that the flames almost reach the sky. 4. Also the Cherubim, that is, a garrison of angels, have been drawn up above the flaming sword to prevent evil spirits from approaching, so that the flames drive off human beings, and angels drive off the wicked angels, in order that access to Paradise may not lie open either to flesh or to spirits that have transgressed.
5. India is so called from the river Indus, by which it is bounded on the west. It stretches from the south sea to the place where the sun rises, and reaches in the north up to the Caucasus range. It has many peoples and towns, also the islands Taprobane (i.e. Sri Lanka), full of precious stones and elephants, Chrysa (cf. ypUoóç, "gold") and Argyre (cf. ?pyUpoç, "silver"), rich in gold and silver (argentum), and Tile, where the trees never lose their foliage. 6. It also has the rivers Ganges, Indus, and the Hypanis, which make India famous. India's soil, very healthful because of the breeze of the west wind, yields two harvests annually; in winter in turn it submits to the Etesian trade-winds. It produces human beings of color, huge elephants, the animal called monoceros (i.e. the unicorn), the bird called parrot, a wood called ebony, and cinnamon, pepper, and sweet calamus. 7. It also yields ivory and precious stones: beryls, chrysoprase, and diamonds, carbuncles, white marble, and small and large pearls much coveted by women of the nobility. There are also mountains of gold there, which one can- not approach because of dragons, griffins, and human monsters of immense size.
8. The region from the border of India to Mesopotamia is generally called Parthia. Due to the invincible strength of the Parthians, Assyria and other adjoining regions also came to be included under its name. Among them are Aracusia, Parthia, Assyria, Media, and Persia - areas that adjoin each other, begin- ning at the river Indus and ending at the Tigris. Harsh and mountainous places are found in them, as well as the rivers Hydaspes and Arbis. These regions are divided from each other by their own borders and they thus derive their names from their respective founders. 9. Aracusia takes its name from its city. Parthia was occu- pied by the Parthians, who came from Scythia, and they named the area after themselves. South of it is the Red Sea, north of it the Caspian Sea, in the west the territory of the Medes. There are eighteen kingdoms in it, stretch- ing from the shores of the Hyrcanian (i.e. Caspian) Sea to the territories of the Scythians.
10. Assyria derives its name from Asshur, son of Shem, who was the first inhabitant of this region after the Flood. It reaches from India in the east to Media in the south, in the west to the Tigris and in the north to the Caucasus, where the Caspian passes are. In this region the purple-fish was first put to use, and from here came the first lotions and perfumes for hair and body,
with which the luxury of the Romans and the Greeks abounded. 11. Media and Persia (Persida) are named after the kings Medus and Persus, who invaded these regions in war. Among these Media obliquely borders the Parthian kingdoms in the west; in the north it is enclosed by Armenia; in the east it overlooks the Caspians; in the south, Persia. Its soil produces the tree 'Medica,' which is rarely found in any other region. There are two Medias, Greater and Lesser Media. 12. Persia reaches in the east to the Indus, in the west it has the Red Sea, in the north it touches Media, in the south-southwest Carmania, which is connected to Persia and in which the most renowned city of Susa is located. Persia is the birthplace of the magi- cal arts. The giant Nebroth went there after the confusion of the tongues and taught the Persians to worship fire, for in those regions everyone worships the sun, which is called El in their language.
13. The word Mesopotamia has a Greek etymology, because it is "bounded by two rivers" (cf. µsooç, "in the middle"; potaµóç, "river"), for in the east it has the Tigris, in the west the Euphrates. In the north its terri- tory begins between Mount Taurus and the Caucasus; in the south it borders on Babylonia, then Chaldaea, and lastly Arabia Felix. 14. The city of Babylon is the cap- ital of Babylonia, from which it also derives its name. It is so famous that at one time or another Chaldaea, Assyria, and Mesopotamia came to be included under its name. 15. The word 'Arabia' means "sacred"; it is inter- preted to mean this because the region produces incense and perfumes: hence the Greeks called it ?ù6a(c)µYv ("happy"), our Latin speakers beatus ("happy"). Its woods produce both myrrh and cinnamon: it is the birthplace of the bird phoenix, and one finds precious stones there: the sardonyx, iris crystal, malachite, and opals. This region is also known as Sabaea, after the son of Cush whose name was Saba. In the east, this land extends in a narrow tract to the Persian gulf; in the north it borders on Chaldaea, in the west on the Arabian Sea.
16. It is said that a certain Syrus, a native of the land, named Syria after himself. In the east its boundary is the Euphrates, in the west the Mediterranean and Egypt; in the north it touches Armenia and Cappadocia, in the south the Arabian Sea. Its territory extends immensely in length, more narrowly in width. 17. It comprises
the provinces Commagene, Phoenicia, and Palestine, to which Judea belongs, except for the Saracens and the Nabateans. Commagene, the first province of Syria, received its name from the city of Commaga, which was once considered to be the capital there. North of it lies Armenia, to the east Mesopotamia, to the south Syria, to the west the Mediterranean. 18. Phoenix, brother of Cad- mus, came from Egyptian Thebes into Syria and ruled over Sidon, and this province was called Phoenicia after his name. In this province Tyre is located, of which Isaiah speaks (Isaiah 23). East of it lies Arabia, south of it the Red Sea.
19. The city of Philistis is the capital of the province of Palestine. It is now called Ascalon. From this city all of the surrounding region receives the name 'Palestine.' East of it lies the Red Sea, on the southern side it is bordered by Judea, in the north it is bounded by the borders of the Tyrians, in the west it comes to an end at the Egyptian border. 20. The Palestinian region Judea (Iudaea) is so called after Judah, from whose tribe it had its kings. Previously it was called Canaan (Chanaan), after a son of Cham (i.e. Ham), or else after the ten tribes of the Canaanites, whose territory the Judeans occupied after they had expelled them. It stretches lengthwise from the village Arfa up to the village Julias, which is inhabited in equal parts by a community of Judeans and of Tyrians. In its width it stretches all the way from Mount Libanus (i.e. Mount Lebanon) to Lake Tiberias (i.e. the Sea of Galilee). 21. In the center of Judea is the city Jerusalem, as if it were the navel of the whole region. It is a land wealthy in various resources, fertile in fruits of the earth, renowned for its waters, rich in balsam-trees. Hence, thanks to the benefits of its natural goods, the Judeans considered it the land flowing with milk and honey promised to their forefathers, because in this place God offered them a foreshadowing of the Resurrection.
22. Samaria is a region in Palestine that received its name from a certain city called Samaria, which was once a royal residence in Israel; nowadays it is known as Sebas- tia, a name that is derived from Augustus (cf. o?ßaotóç, "august"). This region lies in the middle between Judea and Galilee; it begins in the village called Eleas and ends in the territory called Agrabath. The nature of its terri- tory resembles and in no way differs from that of Judea.
23. Galilee (Galilaea) is a region in Palestine which is so called because it produces lighter-skinned people than
Palestine does (cf. y?2a, "milk"). It has two parts, an upper and a lower, which are nevertheless connected and border on Syria and Phoenicia. Its earth is rich, fer- tile, and rather abundant in produce. 24. Pentapolis is a region located where Arabia borders on Palestine. It derives its name from the five wicked cities that were consumed by heavenly fire (see Wisdom 10:6, Vulgate, and cf. v.5 below). Once this land was more fertile than Jerusalem, but today it is deserted and scorched, for due to the wickedness of its inhabitants fire descended from heaven that reduced this region to eternal ashes (Genesis 19:24-25). 25.A kind of shadow and image of it is visible to this day in its ashes and trees, for in this area there is flourishing fruit with such an appearance of ripeness that it makes one want to eat it, but if you gather it, it falls apart and dissolves in ashes and gives off smoke as if it were still burning. 26. Nabathea is a region named after Nabaioth, son of Ishmael. It lies between Judea and Arabia; rising from the Euphrates it stretches to the Red Sea - it is part of Arabia.
27. Egypt (Aegyptus), which was formerly called 'Aeria,' later took its name from Aegyptus, brother of Danaus, who reigned there. In the east it is adjoined by Syria and the Red Sea, to the west lies Libya, in the north the Mediterranean, while in the south it extends toward the interior, reaching Ethiopia, a region unac- customed to rain and unacquainted with downpours.
28. The Nile alone waters it when it overflows and ren- ders it fertile with its flood; whence it is rich in produce and feeds many parts of the earth with grain. Further- more, it overflows with other articles of trade to such an extent that it fills the world with indispensable merchan- dise. Egypt ends at Canopea, named after the helmsman of Menelaos, Canopus, who is buried on the island that marks the beginning of Libya and the mouth of the Nile.
29. Seres is a city of the east after which both the Seres and their region (i.e. China and East Asia) are named. The area bends from the Scythian Ocean and the Caspian Sea to the eastern Ocean. It is rich in a renowned foliage, from which silk-fleece is gathered, which the Seres sell to other peoples for the manufacture of garments. 30. The river Bactrus itself gave its name to Bactria. The parts of it that are further out are surrounded by the range of the Propanisus, while those facing us terminate at the source of the river Indus; the river Ochus is the boundary for the remaining parts. Bactria exports camels of the great- est strength, whose feet never wear out.
31. Like the country of the Goths, Scythia is said to have been named after Magog, son of Japheth. Formerly its territory was immense; it stretched from India in the east and from the Maeotian swamps (i.e. the Sea of Azov) in the north between the Danube and the Ocean up to the borders of Germania. To be sure, later it was reduced in size and then reached from the right-hand region of its east, where the Chinese Ocean extends, up to the Caspian Sea, which is on its west. From there it spreads in the south to the summits of the Caucasus, under which Hyrcania lies, having in like manner many tribes in the west who are nomads due to the infertility of the soil. 32. Among these tribes some cultivate the land, whereas others who are monstrous and savage live on human flesh and blood. Many parts of Scythia have good land, but many are nevertheless uninhabitable, for while many places abound in gold and precious stones, they are rarely visited by human beings because of the savagery of the griffins. The best green gems come from there; lapis lazuli and the purest crystal are Scythian. It also has the great rivers of the Moschi, the Phasis, and the Araxes.
33. Hyrcania is so called after the Hyrcanian forest, which lies below Scythia, having in the east the Caspian Sea, in the south Armenia, in the north Albania and in the west Hiberia (i.e. present-day Georgia). It is a rough forest, full of savage wild beasts such as tigers, panthers, and pards. Vergil says of it (Aen. 4.367):
And Hyrcanian tigresses suckled you.
34. Albania gets its name from the color of its inhabi- tants, because they are born with white (albus) hair. In the east it rises from below the Caspian Sea and extends to the Maeotian swamps (i.e. the Sea of Azov) along the shores of the Ocean in the north, by deserts and unculti- vated regions. This land has enormous dogs; their feroc- ity is such that they attack bulls and kill lions.
35. Armenia is so called from Armenus, the com- panion of Jason of Thessaly. After the death of King Jason he gathered a group from among the crowd of Jason's followers who were wandering aimlessly about, seized Armenia and named it after himself. It is located between the Taurus and the Caucasus ranges, reaching from Cappadocia to the Caspian Sea, having in the north the Ceraunian mountains, in whose hills the river Tigris originates, and in whose mountains the Ark is said to have settled after the Flood. There are two Armenias,
Upper and Lower Armenia, just as there are two Pan- nonias. 36. Hiberia is a region in Asia, near the Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea), connected to Armenia. There herbs grow which can be used for dyeing. 37. Cappadocia was named after its chief city. It is located where Syria begins and touches Armenia in the east, Asia Minor in the west, and the Cimmerian Sea and the Themiscyrian plains, which belong to the Amazons, in the north; in the south it reaches the Taurus mountains, under which Ciliciaand Isauria stretch out to the Gulf of Cilicia, which faces the isle of Cyprus. Its territory excels as a breeding-ground for horses. Through it flows the river Halys, which for- merly separated the kingdom of Lydia from the Persians.
38. Asia Minor is girt by Cappadocia in the east and surrounded by the sea in all other directions, for it has the Black Sea in the north, the Propontis (i.e. the Sea of Marmora) in the west, and the sea of Egypt in the south. Its provinces are Bithynia, Phrygia, Galatia, Lydia, Caria, Pamphylia, Isauria, Lycia, and Cilicia. 39. The first of these provinces of Asia Minor, Bithynia, stretches east- ward from where the Black Sea begins, opposite Thra- cia, and it was previously called many different names, first Bebrycia, then Mygdonia, then Bithynia, after king Bithynus. It is also known as Phrygia Major. The city Nicomedia lies in it, where Hannibal took refuge and died from a drink of poison. 40. Galatia takes its name from ancient tribes of the Galli, by whom it was occu- pied, for the Galli, called upon by the king of Bithynia to assist him, divided the kingdom when victory was achieved. Thus, after they had intermarried with the Greeks, they were first called Gallograeci and are now called Galatians, after the name of the ancient Galli, and their territory is called Galatia.
41. Phrygia is named after Phrygia, the daughter of Europa. It is also called Dardania, after Dardanus, the son of Jupiter, concerning whom Homer says (cf. Iliad 20.215):
Whom Jupiter first begot in the celestial citadel.
Having left from the city of Corythus, he was the first to arrive in Phrygia. This territory is situated above the Troad, with the region of Galatia to the north; in the south it is a neighbor of Lyconia, it borders Lydia in
the east, and in the west it is bounded by the Hellespont. It contains the region of Troy, which Tros, the king of the Trojans and father of Ganymede, named after him- self. There are two Phrygias: Phrygia Major and Phrygia Minor. Smyrna lies in Phrygia Major and Ilium in Phry- gia Minor. 42. Lycaonia . . . The river Hermus separates Caria from Phrygia. 43. Lydia is an old seat of kingdoms, which the waters of the Pactolus have raised to riches with their golden floods. Previously it was called Maeo- nia. Because of its smallness it could not support the two brothers, Lydus and Tyrrhenus, as kings. They therefore drew lots and it fell to Tyrrhenus to leave, with a large number of people, and occupy an area in Gaul that he named Tyrrhenia. Lydia, however, is named after Lydus, the brother of the king, who remained in the province. In the west it borders on Phrygia Minor, in the east it has the city of Smyrna, which is encircled by the river Helles; the rivers Pactolus and Hermus, very rich in golden sand, flow around its fields.
44. Pamphylia... It is said that Isauria is named after the place where it is located, because it lies everywhere exposed to blasts of wind (aura). It has the city of Seleu- cia as its metropolis. 45. Cilicia owes its name to a certain Cilix who, they say, was descended from Phoenix, and they assert that he was older than Jupiter. Many plains lie there, meeting in the west Lycia, in the south the Sea of Issus, at its back the ridges of Mount Taurus. The river Cydnus flows through it. Its capital is Tarsus. The city of Corycus is also located there, whence comes the most and the best saffron, more fragrant in scent and more golden in color. 46. Lycia is so called because in the east it borders on Cilicia, for Cilicia borders on it in the east and it has the sea to the west and the south; in the north lies Caria. There lies Mount Chimera, which exhales fire in nightly surges, like Etna in Sicily and Vesuvius in Cam- pania.
iv. Europe (De Europa) 1. After Asia I must turn my pen to Europe. Europa was the daughter of Agenor, king of Libya, whom Jupiter carried to Crete after she had been abducted from Africa, and the third part of the globe is named after her. This Agenor is the son of Libya, after whom Libya, that is, Africa, is said to have been named; whence it seems Libya took its name first,
and then Europe. 2. The third of the globe that is called Europe (Europa) begins with the river Tanais (i.e. the Don), passing to the west along the northern Ocean as far as the border of Spain, and its eastern and southern parts rise from the Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea) and are bordered the whole way by the Mediterranean and end in the islands of Gades (i.e. Cadiz). 3. The first region of Europe is lower Scythia, which begins in the Maeotian swamps (i.e. the Sea of Azov), stretching between the Danube and the northern Ocean up to Germania. And this land is called Barbarica in general usage on account of the barbaric people by whom it is inhabited. Its first part is Alania, which touches on the Maeotian swamps; after this Dacia, where Gothia is; then Germania, where the Suevi inhabit the greater part.
4. Germania lies beyond lower Scythia. It starts at the Danube and is enclosed by the river Rhine and the Ocean. In the north and in the west the Ocean is its boundary, in the east the Danube, in the south the river Rhine. The country is rich in men and has a numerous and fierce (immanis) population; due to this and its fecundity in producing peoples it is called Germania (cf. germinare, "germinate"). It produces the Hyrcanian birds, whose feathers shine at night; it also produces wild bison, wild oxen, and elk. It exports precious stones, crystal, and amber, as well as green callaica and white ceraunium. There are two parts to Germania: Upper Germania, adjoining the northern Ocean, and Lower Germania, beside the Rhine. 5. The provinces that the Danube sep- arates from Barbaric territory and that stretch to the Mediterranean are as follows: the first is Moesia, so called for its abundant harvests (messis); whence the ancients also called it the granary of Ceres. In the east it is con- nected to the delta of the Danube, in the south-east to Thracia, in the south to Macedonia, in the west to Istria. After Moesia comes Pannonia. Then Noricum, a cold territory of scant productivity. Thereafter Raetia, teem- ing in produce, which comes next to Gallia Belgica.
6. Thracia is said to have gotten its name from Tiras, the son of Japheth, upon his arrival there; others have suggested that Thracia was named after the savagery of its inhabitants (perhaps cf. trux, gen. trucis, "savage," or tpayáç, "rough, savage"). In the east it lies opposite the Propontis (i.e. the Sea of Marmara) and the city of Constantinople, in the north it is bordered by the Ister, in the south by the Aegean, in the west it adjoins Macedonia. Once this region was inhabited by the Bessi,
the Massagetes, the Sarmatians, the Scythians and many other nations; for it is a spacious region and therefore it contained a great number of tribes. From Thracia the river Ebrus flows forth, which also touches upon many barbarian tribes.
7. Greece (Graecia) is so called from king Graecus, who settled this entire region as a kingdom. There are seven Greek provinces. From the west the first is Dalmatia, then Epirus, then Hellas, then Thessaly, then Macedonia, then Achaea, and two in the sea, Crete and the Cyclades. 'Illyricus' generally refers to all of Greece. 8. Dalmatia is thought to have taken its name from Delmi, the most important city of this province. It borders Macedonia in the east, Moesia in the north, to the west it ends in Istria, while in the south it ends at the Adriatic Sea. 9. Epirus is so called from Pyrrhus, son of Achilles. Part of it is Chaonia, which was formerly called Molossia, after Molossus, son of Pyrrhus, whom Pyrrhus fathered with Andromache. But after Pyrrhus was slain by the treach- ery of Orestes, Helenus took Andromache as wife, and held the kingdom for his stepson, who had succeeded his father. From him a part of Epirus was called Molos- sia, which Helenus afterwards named Chaonia, after his brother Chaon, whom he is said to have killed by accident during a hunt - as if this had been done in remembrance of his dead brother.
10. Hellas is so called from king Hellen, the son of Deucalion and Pyrrha; from him the Greeks first took the name Hellenes. This is the same territory as Attica, earlier called 'Acte.' There was a certain Granus, a native of Greece, after whose daughter's name, Attis, Attica was named. It lies in the middle between Macedonia and Achaea, connected to Arcadia on its northern side. This is the true Greece, where the city of Athens was located, the mother of the lib- eral arts and the nurse of philosophers; there was noth- ing nobler and more illustrious in all of Greece. In it (Attica) lies the field of Marathon, by repute once drenched with the blood of battle. 11. There are two provinces of Hellas: Boeotia and the Peloponnese. Boeo- tia is so called for the following reason: when Cadmus, son of Agenor, searched under command of his father for his sister Europa, who had been seized by Jupiter, and he could not find her, he made up his mind to choose a place for exile, fearing the wrath of his father. He followed the tracks of a cow that he had seen by chance and took a liking to the place where it had lain down, and so
he named the place Boeotia, after the word 'cow' (bos). There he built the city of Thebes, in which in ancient times civil wars erupted, and there Apollo was born, and Hercules, most famous of the Thebans. This city is also known by the name of Aeonia, after a certain spring consecrated to Apollo and the Muses, which is located in this same Boeotia. The second part of Hellas is the Peloponnese, named for and ruled by Pelops.
12. Thessaly (Thessalia) takes its name from King Thessalus. It borders on the southern region of Mace- donia and it has Pieria at its back. Many are the rivers [and cities] and towns in Thessaly, Thessalonica being the most outstanding among them. There one also finds Mount Parnassus, which was once consecrated to Apollo. Thessaly was the birthplace of Achilles and the original home of the Lapiths, of whom it is said that they were the first to break horses to the bit, whence they were also called Centaurs (cf. msvtpov, "bit"). In Thessaly golden solidi (i.e. coins) were first manufac- tured and the first use of tamed horses was devised. 13. In the beginning Macedonia was called Emathia, after king Emathius, but afterwards Macedo, who was the mater- nal grandson of Deucalion, took over the rule and he changed the name and called it Macedonia, after his own name. It is bounded in the east by the Aegean Sea, in the south by Achaea, in the west by Dalmatia, in the north by Moesia. It is the fatherland of Alexander the Great, and a region very rich in gold and silver ore. This land produces a stone they call paeanites. Mount Olympus is in this region, which with its lofty peak rises up to such heights that neither clouds nor wind are perceived on its peak.
14. Both the city and the province Achaea are named after king Achaeus. This is almost an island (i.e. the Peloponnese peninsula); for, except for the northern region, which is conjoined to Macedonia, it is sur- rounded on all sides by the sea. In the east it has the Myrtean Sea, in the southeast the Cretan Sea, in the south the Ionian Sea, from the southwest and the west the Cassiopan islands, and only in the northern region is it adjoined to Macedonia and Attica. Corinth is its chief city, the ornament of Greece. Inachus is a river in Achaea.
15. Arcadia is the inmost part of Achaea, shaped like the leaf of a plane tree. It is placed in between the Ionian and the Aegean Sea; Arcas, the son of Iupiter and Callisto, named it Arcadia according to his own name after he had subjugated the Pelasgians. This is also known as Sicyonia, from king Sicyon, after whom the kingdom of the Sicyonians is also named. Arcadia contains the great river Erimanthus. It possesses the stone asbestos, which, once set on fire, is never extinguished. Dazzling white merles are also born there. 16. Lacedaemonia . . . 
Pannonia is named after the Apennine (Appenninus) Alps, by which it is separated from Italy. It is a region strong in men that enjoys good soil and it is surrounded by two rivers that are very rough, the Drava (Dravus) and the Sava (Savus). It is adjacent to Noricum and Raetia; east of it lies Moesia, southeast Istria, south- west the Apennine Alps, in the west Belgian Gaul, in the north the source of the Danube and the border that divides Germania and Gaul. 17. The river Ister, which flows through this land, gives Istria its name. It is also known as the Danube. Pannonia lies to the north of Istria.
18. In times past Italy was called Magna Graecia by the Greeks who occupied it, and then Saturnia, from the name of its king. Later it was also called Latium, because it was here that Saturn hid (latere) after Jupiter had pushed him from his throne. Finally it was called Italy (Italia) after Italus, king of the Sicilians, who reigned there. Its territory is of greater length than width, extend- ing from west-northwest to southeast. Enclosed by the Tyrrhenian Sea to the south and the Adriatic Sea to the north it is bounded in the west by the mountain range of the Alps. It is the most beautiful land in all respects, most pleasing in the fertility of its soil and the richness of its pasture. 19. It has Lake Garda (Benacus), Lake Avernus and the Lucrine Lake, the rivers Po (Eridanus) and Tiber, and the warm springs of Baiae. It produces the precious stones syrtites, lyncurium, and coral, and also the serpent called boa, the wild lynx, and the birds of Diomedes. However, both Italy and Spain are called Hesperia because the Greeks, when they traveled to either Italy or Spain, navigated with the help of the evening star Hesperus. These are distinguished in the following manner: when you speak of Hesperia alone you refer to Italy, whereas when you add Ultima (Farthest) to it you refer to Spain, because it lies in the furthest reaches of the west.
20. Tuscia (cf. Tuscany) is a part of Italy, Umbria a part of Tuscia. Tuscia is named from its frequent use of religious rites and incense (tus), after the term 9U?S?tv ("offer sacrifice"). 21. Umbria, as the histories tell, survived the rains (imber) during the time of a dis- astrous flood and on this account was named ' Oµßp(c)a ("rain") in Greek. It is located in the mountain range of the Apennines, in the part of Italy toward the south.
22. Etruria, a part of Italy, is so named because its bound- aries are extended up to the river bank of the Tiber, as if the word were st?poápta, for st?poç means "other," and opoç means "boundary" - in former times the bound- aries of Rome extended to only one bank of the river Tiber. Others think that Etruria is so named from prince Etruscus. Likewise Tyrrhenia is named from Tyrrhenus, brother of Lydus who, as a result of a drawing of lots, came to Italy from Maeonia with part of his people. This is also known as Tuscia, but we ought not to say Tuscia, because we never see it in writing. Moreover, Tuscia is so named from its frequent use of sacrifice and incense, after the term 9uoat ("to sacrifice"). And there, they say, the art of the haruspex was discovered. 23. Apulia [where Brindisi is located, whichthe Aetolians who had followed Diomedes as leader founded]. 24. Campania [hasterrito- ries that are green in winter and insummer. There the sun is mild, the temperature pleasing, and the air pure and gentle].
25. Gaul (Gallia) is so called from the whiteness of its people, for milk is called y?2a in Greek. The moun- tains and the chilliness of the sky keep the heat of the sun from this region, so that the whiteness of bodies does not darken in color. The Alpine ridges overlook it from the east and the Ocean limits it in the west, the rugged terrain of the Pyrenees in the south, and in the north the river Rhine and Germania. It begins with Belgica and ends with Aquitania. The region is characterized by rich and grassy soil and is well suited for animal husbandry, well watered by streams and springs, with the two great rivers Rhine and Rhone flowing through it. 26. Belgis is a city in Gaul from which the province Belgica is named. Cisalpine Gaul is so called because it is 'on this side of the Alps' (citra Alpes, i.e. from Rome's point of view); Transalpine Gaul, that is, 'across the Alps' (trans Alpes), to the north. Raetia is so called because it is next to the Rhine (Rhenum). 27. Aquitania owes its name to the transverse 'waters' (aqua) of the river Loire (Liger), which is the
boundary of most of it, and which encloses it almost in a circle.
28. Hispania was first named 'Iberia' after the river Iberus (i.e. Hiberus, the Ebro), later 'Hispania' from His- palis (i.e. Seville). This is the real Hesperia (see section 19 above), named after Hesperus, the evening star. It is situated between Africa and Gaul, closed off by the Pyrenees mountains to the north and everywhere else shut in by the sea. It is temperate in its healthy cli- mate, abundant in all types of produce, and very rich in its abundance of precious stones and metals. 29. Great rivers flow through it: the Baetis (Guadalquivir), Mineus (Min˜o), Iberus (Ebro), and Tagus (Tajo), which carries gold, just like the Pactolus (see iii.43 above). It is com- posed of six provinces: the Tarraconian (i.e. of Tarrag- ona), the Cartagenian, Lusitania, Gallicia, Baetica and, across the straits in Africa, the Tingitanian (i.e. of Tang- iers). 30. Furthermore there are two Spains: Inner Spain, whose area extends in the north from the Pyrenees to Cartagena; and Outer Spain, which in the south extends from Celtiberia to the straits of Cadiz. Inner (citerior) and Outer (ulterior) are so called as if it were citra (on this side) and ultra (beyond); but citra is formed as if the term were 'around the earth' (circa terras), and ultra either because it is the last (ultimus), or because after it there is not 'any' (ulla), that is, any other, land.
v. Libya (De Libya) 1. Libya (Libya) is so called because the Libs, the African wind, blows from there. Others say that Epaphus, the son of Jupiter and founder of Memphis in Egypt, had a daughter named Libya with his wife Cas- siopeia, and Libya afterwards established a kingdom in Africa. From her name the land Libya received its name.
2. Further, there are those who think that Africa (Africa) is named as though the word were aprica ("exposed to the sun"), because it is open to the sky and the sun and without bitter cold. Others say Africa is named from one of the descendants of Abraham and Keturah, who was called Afer (i.e. Epher), of whom we made men- tion above (IX.ii.115). 3. Africa begins at the borders of Egypt, stretching along the south through Ethiopia up to the Atlas range. In its northern region it is enclosed by the bordering Mediterranean and is bounded by the straits of Cadiz (i.e. Gibraltar), containing the provinces of Libya Cyrenensis, Pentapolis, Tripolis, Byzacium, Carthage, Numidia, Mauretania Sitifensis, Mauretania Tingitana, and Ethiopia under the burning sun.
4. 
Libya Cyrenensis is in the first part of Africa and is named after Cyrene, the chief city within its borders. From here Egypt is in the east, the Greater Syrtes and the Trogodytae (i.e. the Troglodytes) are in the west, the Libyan Sea lies to the north, and in the south are Ethiopia and various barbarian nations and inaccessible wilder- ness, which also brings forth basilisk serpents. 5. 'Pen- tapolis' inthe Greek tongue is so called after its 'five cities' (cf. psvt?, "five"; pó2tç, "city"), namely Berenice, Ceu- tria, Apollonia, Ptolomais, and Cyrene; of these Ptolo- mais and Berenice were named after their rulers. Pen- tapolis is next to Libya Cyrenensis and is considered to be within its borders. 6. In their own tongue the Greeks also name a province 'Tripolitana' from the number of its three great cities: Oea, Sabrata and Leptis Magna. This province has the Greater Syrtes and the Trogodytae (i.e. the Troglodytes) to the east, the Adriatic Sea in the north, in the west Byzacium and in the south the Gaetuli and the Garamantes, extending to the Ethiopian Ocean.
7. The Bizacene region is allotted its name from its two very famous towns, one of which is called Hadrumetum (perhaps cf. bi-, "two"; SUyóv, "yoke, pair"). This region is located below Tripoli, extendingfor two hundred miles or more, rich in oil, and so rich in its soil that seeds that are sown there return a crop nearly a hundredfold. 8. Great Carthage is in Zeugis. This is the true Africa, situ- ated in between Byzacium and Numidia, bounded in the north by the Sicilian Sea. In the south it stretches as far as the region of the Gaetuli. The nearer part of it is fruit- ful, but the more remote part is filled with wild beasts and serpents and great onagers wandering in the desert. Gaetulia is the interior region of Africa. 9. Numidia is so called after inhabitants that wander about far and wide because they do not have a fixed abode. For in their language temporary and mobile settlements are called numidia. It begins at the river Amsiga and it marks its end in Zeugis. East of it are the Lesser Syrtes, in the north the sea that stretches toward Sardinia, in the west Mau- retania Sitifensis, in the south the tribes of Ethiopia: it is a region of very fertile fields. However, in areas covered by forest it produces wild animals, in steep mountains horses and onagers. It is also renowned for its excellent marble, which is called Numidian marble. It has distin- guished cities as well: Hippo Regius and Rusicada.
10. Mauretania is so called after the color of the inhabitants; for the Greeks call 'black' µaupoç. Just as the name for Gaul is derived from the whiteness of its
inhabitants, so also the name for Mauretania from black- ness. Its principal province is Mauretania Sitifensis, which contained the town of Sitifi, from which the name for the region is thought to be derived. 11. With regard to Mauretania Caesariensis: the main city was a colony called Caesarea, whose name was given to the province. The two provinces are linked together and are bounded in the east by Numidia, in the north by the Mediter- ranean, in the west by the river Malva, in the south by Mount Astrixis, which forms the border between fer- tile earth and the sands that extend up to the Ocean. 12. Mauretania Tingitania is so called after the capital of the province, Tingis (i.e. Tangiers). This end of Africa rises up from seven mountains, bounded in the east by the river Malva, in the north by the straits of Cadiz, in the west by the Atlantic Ocean, in the south by the tribes of the Gaulales, who roam as far as the Hesperian (i.e. "Western") Sea. The region produces wild beasts, apes, dragons, and ostriches. Once it was also full of elephants, which now only India produces.
13. Garama was the capital of the Garamantian region. It lies between Cyrenean Libya and Ethiopia and a spring is located there that cools down in the heat of the day and becomes warmer in the cold of night. 14. Ethiopia is so called after the color of its inhabitants, who are scorched by the proximity of the sun (cf. a­9?tv, "burn"; ?y, gen. ?póç, "face"). Indeed, the coloring of the peo- ple demonstrates the force of the sun, for it is always hot there, because all of its territory is under the South Pole. Around the western part it is mountainous, sandy in the middle, and desert toward the east. It stretches from Mount Atlas in the west to the borders of Egypt in the east, bounded in the south by the Ocean and in the north by the river Nile. It has very many tribes, fearsome with their different faces and strange appearance. 15. It also teems with a multitude of wild beasts and serpents. There, indeed, the rhinoceros and the giraffe are found, the basilisk, and huge dragons from whose brains pre- cious stones are extracted. There one finds the hyacinth stone as well as the chrysoprase, and cinnamon is gath- ered there. 16. There are two Ethiopias: one to the east, another to the west, in Mauretania.
17. Apart from these three parts of the world there exists a fourth part, beyond the Ocean, further inland toward the south, which is unknown to us because of the burning heat of the sun; within its borders are said to live the legendary Antipodes. Mauretania, however, lies
next to Spain; then comes Numidia, then the territory of Carthage, after which we gather that there is Gaetulia, and after that Ethiopia; beyond that are places scorched by the heat of the sun.
18. It should, indeed, be understood that some provinces were first named after their founders; after- wards the name of the inhabitants was derived from the name of the province. Thus, 'Italy' (Italia) comes from 'Italus' (see IX.ii.85), and in turn from 'Italy' comes the term 'an Italian' (Italus); and in this way we use a name for the people that is the same as the name of the founder, from whose name derives the name of the province. And this is how it happens that a city, a territory, and a people are all named after a single name. 19. Provinces, more- over, received their name for a reason. Aprincipate (prin- cipatus) over nations is a term that that applied to for- eign kings; when the Romans brought these under their own jurisdiction by conquering (vincere) it, they called such far-off regions provinces (provincia). A fatherland (patria) is so called because it is common to all who were born in it (cf. pater, "father"). 20. Earth (terra), as we have said before (cf. XIII.iii), signifies an element: lands (terrae, i.e. the plural of terra), by contrast, signify certain parts of the world, such as Africa or Italy. It is the same with areas (locus); for in the 'globe of lands' (orbis terrarum) areas and expanses of land contain in themselves many provinces; just as in the body an area is a single part, containing many members; and just as a house has many rooms in it. Thus, expanses of land are called lands and areas, and provinces are parts of those, as Phrygia is part of Asia, Raetia part of Gaul, and Baetica part of Spain.
21. Now Asia is an area, Phrygia is a province of Asia, Troy is a region of Phrygia, and Ilium is a city of Troy. Likewise regions are parts of provinces, and are commonly called conventus, such as Troy in Phry- gia, Cantabria and Asturia in Galicia. The term 'region' (regio) comes from governors (rector), and territories are parts of regions. 22.A territory (territorium) is so called as if it were tauritorium, that is, 'broken by a plow' (tri- tum aratro) and by a team of oxen (cf. taurus, "bull") - for the ancients used to designate the boundaries of their possessions and territories by cutting a furrow.
vi. Islands (De insulis) 1. Islands (insula) are so called because they are 'in salt water' (in salo), that is, in the sea. Of these the best known and the biggest, which many of
the ancients investigated with expert effort, should be noted.
2. Britannia is an island in the Ocean, cut off from the whole globe by the intervening sea; it takes its name from the name of its inhabitants. It is situated opposite the region of Gaul, looking towards Spain; its circum- ference is 24,000 (Roman) miles. There are many great rivers there, hot springs, a great and varied abundance of metals: it is rich in jet and pearls. 3. Thanet is an island in the Ocean in the Gallic (i.e. English) channel, separated from Britannia by a narrow estuary, with fruitful fields and rich soil. It is named Thanet (Tanatos) from the death of serpents (cf. 9?vatoç, "death"). Although the island itself is unacquainted with serpents, if soil from it is carried away and brought to any other nation, it kills snakes there. 4. Ultima Thule (Thyle ultima) is an island of the Ocean in the northwestern region, beyond Bri- tannia, taking its name from the sun, because there the sun makes its summer solstice, and there is no daylight beyond (ultra) this. Hence its sea is sluggish and frozen.
5. The Orkneys (Orcades) are islands of the Ocean within Britannia, numbering thirty-three, of which twenty are uninhabited and thirteen colonized. 6. Ire- land (Scotia), also known as Hibernia, is an island next to Britannia, narrower in its expanse of land but more fertile in its site. It extends from southwest to north. Its near parts stretch towards Iberia (Hiberia) and the Cantabrian Ocean (i.e. the Bay of Biscay), whence it is called Hibernia; but it is called Scotia, because it has been colonized by tribes of the Scoti. There no snakes are found, birds are scarce, and there are no bees, so that if someone were to sprinkle dust or pebbles brought from there among beehives in some other place, the swarms would desert the honeycombs.
7. Cadiz (Gadis) is an island located at the edge of the province of Baetica. It separates Europe from Africa. The pillars of Hercules can be seen there, and from there the current of the Ocean flows into the entrance of the Tyrrhenian Sea. It is divided from the mainland by a dis- tance of six hundred (Roman) feet. When the Tyrians, who had come from the Red Sea, occupied it, they called it in their language Gadir, that is, "enclosed," because it is enclosed on all sides by the sea. This island produces a palm-like tree whose sap, when mixed with glass, pro- duces the precious stone called ceraunius. 8. The Fortu- nate Isles (Fortunatarum insulae) signify by their name that they produce all kinds of good things, as if they were
happy and blessed with an abundance of fruit. Indeed, well-suited by their nature, they produce fruit from very precious trees; the ridges of their hills are spontaneously covered with grapevines; instead of weeds, harvest crops and garden herbs are common there. Hence the mistake of pagans and the poems by worldly poets, who believed that these isles were Paradise because of the fertility of their soil. They are situated in the Ocean, against the left side of Mauretania, closest to where the sun sets, and they are separated from each other by the intervening sea.
9. The Gorgades are islands of the Ocean opposite the promontory that is called Hesperian Ceras, inhabited by the Gorgons, women with swift wings and a rough and hairy body; the islands take their name from them. They are separated from the mainland by a passage of two days' sailing. 10. The isles of the Hesperides are so called after the city of Hesperis, which was located within the borders of Mauretania. They are situated beyond the Gorgades, at the Atlantic shore, in the most remote bays of the sea. Stories tell of an ever-watchful dragon guarding golden apples in their gardens. There, it is said, is a channel from the sea that is so twisted, with winding banks, that when seen from afar it looks like the coils of a serpent.
11. Chryse and Argyre are islands situated in the Indian Ocean, so rich in metal that many people maintain these islands have a surface of gold and silver; whence their names are derived (see iii.5 above). 12. Taprobane (i.e. Sri Lanka) is an island that lies to the south-east of India. The Indian Ocean begins there. It is 875 (Roman) miles long and 625,000 stades wide. It is intersected bya river and everywhere full of pearls and precious stones. Part of it is full of wild beasts and elephants, while another part is occupied by human beings. It is said that this island has two summers and two winters every year, and that flowers bloom twice there. 13. Tiles is an Indian island where the vegetation is green in every season. Thus far of islands in the Ocean.
14. Further, islands are situated in the Mediterranean, from the Hellespont to Cadiz. The island of Cyprus (Cypros) took its name from the city of Cyprus, which is located there. This island is also known as Paphos, ded- icated to Venus, and it lies in the southern part of the Carpathian Sea. Once it was well known for its wealth, especially for copper, for this metal was first discovered and put to use there. 15. Crete is a part of Greece, close to and opposite the Peloponnese. Due to its mild climate it was first called Macaronnesos (cf. µam?ptoç, "blessed"; v?ooç "isle"); thereafter it was called Crete (Creta), after one of its inhabitants, a certain Cres (gen. Cretis), who people say was one of the Curetes; Jupiter was concealed there and nursed by them. This is the Greek island that stretches the longest distance from east to west, bathed by Greek currents inthe north, and by Egyptian waves inthe south. Once it was ennobled by a hundred cities, whence it was also called Hecatompolis (cf. smatóv, "hundred"; pó2tç, "city"). 16. It was the first to be famous for rowing and archery, the first to put laws into writing, and the first to train cavalry units. The pursuit of music composed in Idaean dactyls began on this island. It is plentiful in goats and lacks deer; it nowhere produces wolves or foxes or other harmful wild beasts; there are no serpents there and no night owls, and if one comes upon the island, it dies immediately. It is abundant in vines and trees. The herb dittany grows in Crete, as well as purslane, which when chewed stops hunger for a day. It pro- duces venomous spiders and a stone that is called 'dactyl of Ida.'
17. Abydos is an island in Europe, positioned above the Hellespont, cut off by a narrow and dangerous sea; it is called *ßU6oç in Greek because it is at the entrance to the Hellespont, where Xerxes built a bridge constructed from ships and crossed over into Greece (cf. ?ßatoç, "not fordable"). 18. Cos (Coos) is an island lying adjacent to the province of Attica; on it the physician Hippocrates was born and, as Varro testifies, it was first famous for the art of preparing wool for the adornment of women.
19. The Cyclades were in ancient times islands of Greece, and people believe that they were called Cyclades because, although they project out a rather long way from Delos, they are nevertheless arranged in a circle
around it - for the Greeks call a circle mám2oç. But oth- ers think that they are so called not because the islands are arranged in a circle, but because of the sharp rocks that are situated around them (i.e. that encircle them).
20. They lie in the Hellespont, between the Aegean and the Malean Sea, and they are surrounded by Myrtoan waters. They are fifty-three in number, extending from north to south for five hundred miles, and from east to west for two hundred (Roman) miles. Their principal city is Rhodes.
21. Delos is the island located in the center of the Cyclades. It is said to be called Delos because, after the deluge known to have occurred during the reign of Ogy- gus, when the globe was cast into continuous night for many months, it was the first among all places of the earth to be lit by the rays of the sun; it was allotted its name from having been the first to become visible to the eyes; for the Greeks say 6?2oç for "plainly visible." The island is also called Ortygia, because there the birds called 'quails' were seen for the first time; the Greeks call them optUy?ç. On this island, Latona gave birth to Apollo and Diana. The name Delos is applied to both the city and the island. 22. Rhodes is the first of the Cyclades from the east. The rosebud is said to have been dis- covered there when the city was founded, whence both the town and the island are called Rhodes (Rhodos; cf. pó6ov, "rose"). In this city was the bronze Colossus of the Sun, seventy cubits high; there were also one hun- dred smaller colossi on this island. 23. Tenedos, one of the Cyclades, is located in the north, where a city was founded formerly by a certain Tenes. After him the city, or rather the island, was named; for this Tenes was infa- mous for having had intercourse with his stepmother, [and] inescaping he took possession of this island, which was empty of inhabitants; whence it was called Tenedos. Thus says Cicero (cf. Second Action Against Verres 1.49): "Tenes himself, after whom Tenedos was named."
24. Carpathos, another one of the Cyclades, is located in the south, facing Egypt; the Carpathian Sea is named after it, while the island itself is so called because crops ripen there so quickly (cf. mappóç, "crops"). It lies between Egypt and Rhodes. Carpasian ships, which are big and spacious, are also said to come from this island.
25. The island Cytherea is one of the Cyclades located in the west; its former name was Porphyris. It was called Cytherea because Venus was born there. 26. Icaria is an island of the Cyclades which gives the Icarian Sea its
name. Located between Samos and Mykonos, it is inhos- pitable due to jutting rocks and a lack of bays offering harbor. It is said that Icarus the Cretan died there in ship- wreck and that upon his death his name was given to that place. 27. The island of Naxos is named after Dionysius (i.e. Dionysus, the god of wine), as if it were Dionaxos, because it surpasses all others in the fertility of its vines. It lies eighteen (Roman) miles from Delos. Once upon a time Jupiter is said to have proceeded from there to fight the Titans.
28. Melos is the roundest island among all of the Cyclades; wherefrom its name is derived (cf. µ?2ov, Latin malum, "round fruit," and see XVII.vii.3). 29. History says that Iasion had two sons, Philomelus and Plutus, and that Philomelus fathered Pareantus, who gave his name to the island and the city of Paros; first it was called Minoia, then Paros. Vergil writes of it (Aen. 3.126):
And snow-white Paros,
for it produces the whitest marble, which is called Par- ian marble. It also exports the sarda stone (i.e. car- nelian), more outstanding than marble, but when con- sidered as a gemstone, the cheapest. 30. The island of Chios is so called in the Syrian language because mas- tic is produced there, for the Syrians call mastic chio.
31. Samos is an island in the Aegean Sea. Juno was born there and the Samian Sybil as well as Samian Pythagoras came from there. The latter coined the term 'philosophy' (philosophia). Tradition has it that clay vases were first invented on this island - whence vases are also called Samian.
32. Sicily (Sicilia) was named 'Sicania' after king Sicanus, then 'Sicily' after Siculus, the brother of Italus. But in earliest times it was known as Trinacria, because it has three ?mpa ("capes"), that is, promontories: Pelorus, Pachynum, and Lilybaeum. Trinacria is in Greek what in Latin would be triquetra, as if divided into 'three pieces' (tres quadrae). It is separated from Italy by a narrow strait, and looks out upon the African Sea; it has rich soil and abundant gold, and is riddled with caves and tunnels, full of winds and sulfur; accordingly the flames of Mount Etna show themselves there. In this strait Scylla and Charybdis either swallow up ships or smash them.
33. At one time this was the native land of the Cyclopes, and afterwards the nurse of tyrants; fertile in crops, it was the first of all lands to be riven by the plow and planted with seed. It has Syracuse as its principal city, the spring
Arethusa, and the river Alpheus, "parent of magnificent horses" (cf. Vergil, Aen. 3.704). On this island comedy was first invented. 34. This island first produced from the river Achates the agate (achates) stone. Its sea produces coral and it yields the Agrigentian salts, which dissolve in fire and crackle in water. Its entire circumference is three thousand stades (i.e. 375 Roman miles). Sallust (see His- tories 4.26) moreover says that Sicily used to be joined to Italy, but that the intervening space was divided by the onslaught of the sea and cut across its narrowest part.
35. The island Thapsus lies ten stades (i.e. 1.25 Roman miles) away from Sicily and is rather low-lying, whence its name (cf. tap?tvóç, "low-lying"). Vergil writes of it (Aen. 3.689):
And low-lying Thapsus.
36. The Aeolian islands of Sicily (i.e. the Lipari) are named after Aeolus, son of Hippotes, whom poets feigned to have been the king of the winds: to the con- trary, according to Varro, he was the ruler of these islands and, because he would predict from their clouds and smoke the future direction of winds, he seemed to na¨ive people to have controlled the winds by his own power. These islands are also called Vulcanian, because they burn like Etna (i.e. site of the forge of Vulcan). 37. Nine of these islands have proper names. A certain Liparus called the first of these Lipare. He ruled Lipare before Aeolus. The second is called Hiera, because it has the loftiest hills (perhaps cf. ¬?póç, "holy"). As for the rest, they are Strongyle (i.e. Stromboli), Didyme, Eriphusa, Hep- haestia, Phaenicusa, Euonymos, Tripodes, and Sonores. Because they burn at night, they are called the Aeolians or the Vulcanians. Some of them did not exist at first; later they were elevated from the sea and they remain up to this day.
38. The Stoechades (i.e. Isles d'Hye`res) are islands of Massilia (i.e. Marseilles) sixty (Roman) miles distant from the mainland, facing the province of Narbonne where the river Rhone empties into the sea. They are named Ctoty?6?ç in Greek as if they were placed 'in a row' (cf. ototy?ç, "in a row") by design. 39. Sardus, son of Hercules, occupied Sardinia after he came from Libya with a great host, and named the island after himself. This island, located in the African Sea, has the shape of a human footprint; it is broader in the east than in the west, whereas the southern and northern coasts are
practically the same length, and for this reason, before there was traffic there, it was called by Greek sailors ï Iyvoç ("footprint"). 40. The land extends 140 (Roman) miles in length and 40 miles in width. No serpent or wolf is born there, only the solifuga,a small animal that is most hurtful to humans. Also, nothing poisonous grows there, except the plant, mentioned by many writers and poets, that is similar to wild parsley, makes people contort in a rictus, and kills them as if they were grinning. Sardinia has hot springs that bring healing to the sick and blind- ness to thieves if they touch their eyes with this water after an oath has been given.
41. Ligurian settlers founded the island of Corsica, naming it after the one who guided them there, a cer- tain Ligurian woman by the name of Corsa, who saw a bull from the herd she was guarding close to the shore habitually swim across and return fattened shortly after- wards. Eager to discover his unknown pasture, when he strayed from the herd she followed the bull in a boat to the island. Learning of the island's fertility after her return, the Ligurians went there on rafts and named the island after the woman who found it and guided them there. 42. This island is also known in Greek as Kápv?, from having been inhabited by Cyrnus, the son of Her- cules. Vergil says of it (cf. Ecl. 9.30):
Corsican (Cyrneus) yews.
It is separated from Sardinia by a strait of twenty (Roman) miles and surrounded by the Ligurian gulf on its Italian side. It has many sheer headlands, produces quite delightful pastures, and a stone that is called cato- chites by the Greeks.
43. Ebosus (i.e. Ibiza) is a Spanish island, so called because it is not far 'from Zanium' (a Zanio), as if its name were abozus; for it lies seventy stades (i.e. about nine miles) from it. Serpents flee its soil. Opposite it is Colubraria (cf. coluber, "serpent"), which is full of ser- pents. 44. The Baleares are two Spanish islands: Aphrosi- ades and Gymnasides, a bigger one (maior) and a smaller one (minor), whence they are also called Maiorica (i.e. Majorca) and Minorica (i.e. Minorca) by the common people. In these islands the sling with which stones are hurled was first invented - whence they are called the Baleares, for ß?22?tv in Greek means "throw." From the
same root are derived the terms ballista (i.e. a kind of catapult), as if it were "the one thrown," and fundibalum (i.e. another such machine; see XVIII.x.2). Vergil says of them (Geo. 1.309):
The thongs of the Balearic sling.
vii. Promontories (De promuntoriis) 1. It is charac- teristic of islands that they 'jut out' (prominere), whence these places are called promontories (promuntorium). Thus, Sallust says of Sardinia (Histories 2.2): "It juts out (prominere) wider in the east than in the west."
2. Sigeum is a promontory of Asia, located where the Hellespont opens out more widely. It is called Sigeum due to the silence of Hercules, because, denied hos- pitality by the Trojan king Laomedon, he feigned his departure and from there came back against Troy in silence, which is called oty?. 3. Maleum is a promon- tory in Greece that juts out into the sea and extends for fifty (Roman) miles; the waves in this place are so fierce that they seem to pursue those traveling by ship. This promontory was named after Maleus, king of the Argives. 4. The Sicilian promontory of Pelorum, which is oriented toward the north, according to Sallust (cf. His- tories 4.39) was named after a general of Hannibal's who is buried there. 5. The Sicilian promontory Pachynum, which looks towards the south-west, is so called from the density of its air - for the term payáç means "thick" and "dense" - as the south-west wind blows there. 6. Lilybaeum is a promontory of Sicily, extending to the west. It is named after a city of the same name that is located there. 7. Borion is a promontory in Numidia, so called because it stretches north (cf. boreas, "the north"). Afterwards it was called Hippo Regius, because it was cut off by the sea. Calpis is a Spanish promontory.
viii. Mountains and other terms for landforms (De montibus ceterisque terrae vocabulis) 1. Mountains (mons) are the highest swellings of the land, so called because they 'stand out' (eminere). Some of them owe their names to particular causes. We should mention those that are commonly thought to be the greatest.
2. The Caucasus range stretches from India to the Tau- rus and has many different names because of the variety of peoples and of languages in every direction through which it passes. Thus, toward the east, where it rises to greater height, it is called Caucasus, due to the whiteness
of its snow, for in an eastern language, caucasus means "white," that is, shining white with a very thick snow cover. For the same reason the Scythians, who live next to this mountain range, call it Croacasim, for among them whiteness or snow is called casim. 3. The Taurus range is likewise called the Caucasus by many. 4. Libanus (i.e. Mount Lebanon) is the highest mountain in Phoeni- cia, mentioned by the prophets. It gets its name from incense (cf. libanus, "frankincense"), because incense is collected there. That part of Libanus that is beyond it, facing toward the east, is called the Antilibanus, that is "opposite Libanus." 5. Ararat is a mountain in Armenia, on which historians attest that the ark settled after the Flood. Whence even to this day remnants of its wood can be seen there.
6. The Acroceraunian mountains are so called because of their height (cf. ?mpoç, "highest") and the hurling of thunderbolts, for in Greek a thunderbolt is called m?p- aUvóç. They lie between Armenia and Iberia (see iii.33 and 36 above), begin at the Caspian passes, and extend to the source of the river Tigris. 7. The Hyberborean mountains of Scythia are so called because the north wind (Boreas) blows above, that is, beyond them (cf. úpsp, "beyond"). 8. The Riphaean mountains are in the far reaches of Germania, named from the perpetual gusts of wind; for pt??? in Greek means "thrust" and "ópµ?" (i.e. another Greek word meaning "thrust"), from the term p(c)pt?tv ("hurl"). 9. Olympus is an exceedingly high mountain in Macedonia, so high that they say there are clouds below it. Vergil says about it (actually Lucan, Civil War 2.271):
Olympus towers over the clouds.
It is called Olympus as if the word were Ololampus, that is, as if it were "sky" (cf. ó2o2aµp?ç, "entirely resplen- dent"). This mountain divides Macedonia from Thra- cia. 10. Athos is a mountain in Macedonia that also rises higher than the clouds, so high that its shadow reaches to Lemnos, which lies seventy-six (Roman) miles away.
11. Parnassus is a mountain in Thessaly, close to Boeo- tia, whose twin peaks reach into the heavens. This one is split into two ridges, Cyrrha and Nissa; whence also its name, because Apollo and Liber are worshipped on the respective ridges. These ridges are also named Cithaeron and Helicon, after two brothers, for Helicon is named after Helicon, the brother of Cythaeron. 12. The Ceraunians are a mountain range in Epirus, named
after frequent lightning, for in Greek lightning is called m?paUvóç. 13. The Apennines are so called as if they were the 'Carthaginian Alps' (Alpes Poeninae), because when he came to Italy, Hannibal laid these Alps open. Whence Vergil also says (Aen. 10.13):
He throws open the Alps,
because Hannibal, after the war in Spain, rent them open with vinegar; thus Juvenal (Satires 10.153):
And he rent the mountain with vinegar.
And thereafter those places that he rent were called the Apennine Alps.
14. Mount Etna is so called from fire (cf. a­9?tv, "burn") and sulfur; Gehenna likewise (see ix.9 below). It is well known that, in the part in which the south- east wind or the south-west wind blows, it has caves that are filled with sulfur and that lead to the sea. When the waves rush into these caves, they create a wind that, when stirred up, ignites a fire inthe sulfur; this creates the flames that one sees. 15. The Pyrenees (Pyrenaeus) them- selves are also named after the frequent fires caused by lightning, for in Greek 'fire' is called pup. They are placed between Gaul and Hispania as if they were a man-made bulwark.
16. Mount Solurius (i.e. Solorius) is named after singu- larity, because it alone (solus; and cf. opoç, "mountain") is seen to be higher than all the rest of the mountains of Hispania, [or else, because when the sun (sol) rises, its rays are seen there even before the sun]. 17. Calpe (i.e. the Rock of Gibraltar) is a mountain at the extreme limit of the Ocean, and it separates Europe from Africa; it is said to be the place where the Atlas range ends. Lucan writes of it (Civil War 1.555):
(With great waves the sea) covered Hesperian Calpe and highest Atlas.
Atlas was Prometheus' brother and the king of Africa, and is said to have been the inventor of astrology (i.e. in modern terms astronomy and astrology) and for that reason he is said to have held up the heavens. Therefore, because of his expertise in that art and his knowledge of the heavens, the African mountain range was named after him that nowadays is called Atlas. Because of its height it seems as if it supports the celestial spheres and the stars. 18. The Alps are properly speaking a mountain range in Gaul. Vergil calls them (Geo. 3.474) "lofty Alps,"
and in calling them "lofty" he renders word for word, for in the Gallic language high mountains are called alpes. These are mountains that function as the defense of Italy.
19. Foothills (colles) are the more prominent ridges of mountains, as if their name were derived from col- lum ("neck"). 20. Mountain ridges (iugum) are so called because they are joined (iungere) in their proximity. 21. A hill (tumulus) is a low mountain, as if the word were derived from 'swelling earth' (tumens tellus). Likewise, tumulus is the word for heaped-up earth (i.e. a burial mound), where there is no monument. 22. Valleys (val- lis) are low-lying places, as if the word were vulsus ("torn away," ppl. of vellere). Hence also 'enclosed valleys' (con- vallis) are low places of land between mountains. 23. A plain (campus) is a flat piece of land. It is called a plain because it lies low 'for feet' (pes, gen. pedis; cf. poáç, gen. po6óç), not raised like the mountains, but stretched out and leveled in its space and lying flat; whence in Greek it is called p?6(c)ov. It takes its name from a Greek etymol- ogy, for the Greeks say yaµa(c) (lit. "on the ground") for 'low'.
24. 'The ground' (solum) is anything that supports, and is so called fromits solidity (soliditas). Whence Vergil also says with regard to the sea (Aen. 5.199):
And the ground (solum, i.e. sea floor) is pulled away.
25. Woodlands (saltus) are vast, wooded places, where the trees rise (ex(s)ilire, from salire, "leap") high. 26. Passes (fauces) are narrow passages between high mountains, narrow and tight places, so called from a likeness to the throat (faucis), as if the word were foces. 27. Confrages are places into which winds rush from all sides, and there they dash themselves. As Naevius says (fr. 58):
Into the mountains, where the winds would dash against the place.
28. Scabra are places that are rough with neglect. Whence one also says scabies, from a roughness of the body. 29. Dens (lustrum) are secret hiding-places of wild beasts and lairs of wolves. Whence also brothels (lupanar) are called lustra, namely by antiphrasis, because they are poorly lit (illustrare).
27. A grove (lucus) is a place enclosed by dense trees that keep light (lux, gen. lucis) from reaching the ground. It is also possible that the word is derived from the light- ing (conlucere) of many lights, which were kindled there because of pagan beliefs and rituals. 31. Wildernesses
(desertum) are so called because they are not planted (serere), and therefore, in a manner of speaking, they are abandoned (deserere), as are wooded and mountainous areas, places that are the opposite of fruitful regions that have the richest soil. 32. 'Remote places' (devium) are secret and concealed, as if they were away from the road (via). The same places are also called impassable places (invium). Whence also secret places that lie out of the way and are only accessible to birds (avis) are called nesting- places (aviarium). Whence also as follows (Vergil, Geo. 2.430):
The wild nesting-places (aviaria) grow red with berries.
33. According to Varro, 'pleasant places' (locus amoenus) are so called because they promote love (amor) only and draw to themselves things that ought to be loved. According to Verrius Flaccus they are so called, because they are without a 'public function' (munus), nor is anything in them like business, as if the term were amunia, that is, without profit, whence no profit is ren- dered. Thence also those that are responsible for noth- ing are called 'exempt ones' (immunis). 34. 'Sunny spots' (apricum) are places which enjoy the sun, as if the term were ?v?U ??p(c)m?ç, that is, "without cold"; or else because they are open to the sky (apertus caelo). 35. By contrast, shady (opacus) places are the opposite of sunny spots, as if the word were opertum caelum ("hidden sky"). 36. A place is called a 'slippery place' (lubricum) because someone slips (labi) there; and it is called a slippery place, not because it slips, but because in this place a person slips. 37. 'Summer pastures' (aestiva) are shady places in which cattle avoid the heat of the sun in sum- mer (aestas). Statius writes (Thebaid 1.363):
And the summer pastures (aestiva) of shady Lycaeus lay open.
38. Dockyards (navalia) are places where ships (navis) are built. This place is also called a shipyard (textrinum).
39. An anchorage (statio) is where ships stay (stare) for a while; a harbor (portus), where they winter; an unsuit- able (inportunus) place, however, is one where there is no refuge, in a manner of speaking, no harbor. 40. More- over, a harbor is a place that is protected fromexposure to the winds, where the winter winds would make things difficult, and harbor (portus) is derived from convey- ing (deportare) trade-goods. The ancients would call it a harbor 'for shipping' (baia), from conveying (baiolare)
merchandise, with the same declension - baia, gen. baias - as the declension familia, gen. familias ("house- hold"). 41. The shore (litus) is land next to water and the sea: and it is called litus, because it is dashed (elid- ere) by the waves, or else because it is bathed (alluere) by water. Cicero says in Topics (32): "The shore is where the waves play (eludere)." 42. 'Alluvial land' (circumluvium) is a place which water 'flows around' (circumluere); a 'flood plain' (alluvium) is an eroding of riverbanks by water. A border (margo) is a part of every place, as for example of the sea (mare); after which it is also named. 'Maritime places' (maritime) are so called as if the word were maris intima ("near the sea"). 43. River-mouths (ostium) are so called from the entrance and exit of a river into the sea. A mainland (continens) is a stretch of continuous land uninterrupted by any sea, what the Greeks call ?p?tpoç.
ix. The lower regions (De inferioribus) 1. A cave (specus) is a subterranean rift from which it is possible to 'look out' (prospicere); it is op?2atov in Greek, spelunca ("cave") in Latin. 2. Fumarole (spiraculum) is the name given to all places of pestilential exhalation (spiritus), which the Greeks call xapÛv?ta, or %y?póvt?ta. Varro, too, calls such a place a fumarole; and fumaroles are so called because they are places where the earth pro- duces an exhalation. 3.A cleft (hiatus) is a deep break of the earth, as if the term were 'a departure' (itus, ppl. of ire). Properly speaking, however, hiatus is the opening of the mouth of a human being, with the sense trans- ferred from wild beasts, whose eagerness for something is shown through opening of the mouth. 4. The deep (profundum) is properly said of something as if its bot- tom (fundus) were 'far off' (porro). Incorrectly, however, 'the deep' is applied to what is on high as well as what lies below, as in (Vergil, Aen. 1.58):
The seas, the lands, and the deep (profundus) sky.
5. Abyss (baratrum, i.e. barathrum, i.e. ß?pa9pov, "pit") is the word for an excessive depth: and it is called baratrum, as if the term were vorago atra ("black abyss"), that is, black from its depth. 6. Erebus is the deep inner part of the underworld. Styx is so called after the
term otUy?póç, that is, from "wretchedness," because it makes people wretched, or else because it brings forth wretchedness. 7. Cocytus is an underworld place of which Job speaks thus . .. (see Job 21:33). Cocytus, however, has taken its name from Greek, from affliction and sighing (cf. mYmUtóç, "wailing"). 8. Tartarus is so called either because everything in it is disturbed (turbatus), after the word taptap(c)S?tv ("quake"), or, more likely, from tapay? ("disturbance, upheaval"), that is, from shiver- ing, through being numb with cold, because, of course, it lacks light and sunshine. In that place exist neither the warmth generated by sunlight, nor any breath of air stirred by the movement of the sun, but instead a perpet- ual numbness, for taptap(c)S?tv means "shuddering" and "trembling" in Greek. Indeed, in that place is "weeping and gnashing of teeth" (Matthew 8:12, etc.).
9. Gehennaisaplace of fire and sulphur that is believed to have been named from a valley, consecrated to idols, that is next to the city wall of Jerusalem, and which was once filled with the corpses of the dead - for there the Hebrews used to sacrifice their children to demons - and the place itself is called Gehennon. Therefore the place of future punishment (i.e. hell), where sinners are to be tormented, is designated by the name of this place. They also say that there are two Gehennas, one of fire and one of cold. 10. The underworld (inferus) is so called because it is underneath (infra). Just as with reference to physical bodies if things are arranged according to their weight, all heavier ones are lower, so with reference to the spirit, all the more grievous ones are lower; whence in the Greek language the origin of the term by which the underworld is called is said to echo 'what has nothing sweet' (i.e. taking the Greek (tm)A6?ç, "Hades, underworld," as from a
+¡6áç, "not sweet"). 11. Just as the heart of an animal is in its center, so also the underworld is said to be in the center of the earth. Whence we read in the Gospel (Matthew 12:40): "In the heart of the earth." But philosophers say that the 'lower regions' (inferi) are so named because souls are carried (ferre) there from here.
