i. The languages of nations (De linguis gentium) 1. The diversity of languages arose with the building of the Tower after the Flood, for before the pride of that Tower divided human society, so that there arose a diver- sity of meaningful sounds, there was one language for all nations, which is called Hebrew. The patriarchs and prophets used this language not only in their speech, but also in the sacred writings. But at the outset there were as many languages as there were nations, and then more nations than languages, because many nations sprang from one language stock. 2. The term 'languages' (lin- gua) is used in this context for the words that are made by the tongue (lingua), according to the figure of speech by which the thing that produces is named after the thing that is produced. Thus we will say 'mouth' for 'words,' as we speak of the letters we form as 'a hand.'
3. There are three sacred languages - Hebrew, Greek, and Latin - which are preeminent throughout the world. On the cross of the Lord the charge laid against him was written at Pilate's command in these three languages (John 19:20). Hence - and because of the obscurity of the Sacred Scriptures - a knowledge of these three languages is necessary, so that, whenever the wording of one of the languages presents any doubt about a name or an interpretation, recourse may be had to another language. 4. Greek is considered more illustrious than the other nations' languages, for it is more sonorous than Latin or any other language. We can distinguish five varieties of Greek. The first of these is called motv?, that is, 'mixed' or 'common,' which everyone uses. 5. The secondis Attic (Atticus), namely the
Greek of Athens (Atheniensis), which all the authors of Greece used. The third is Doric, which the Egyptians and Syrians employ. The fourth, Ionic; the fifth, Aeolic, which they say the Eolisti spoke. In examining the Greek language we find settled differences of this kind, because their speaking communities were dispersed in this way.
6. Some say there are four varieties of Latin, that is, Ancient (Priscus), Latin, Roman, and Mixed. The Ancient is that uncouth language that the oldest peo- ple of Italy spoke in the age of Janus and Saturn, and it is preserved in the songs of the Salii. Then Latin, which the Etruscans and others in Latium spoke in the age of Lat- inus and the kings, and in this variety the Twelve Tables were written. 7. Then Roman, which arose after the kings were driven out by the Roman people. In this variety the poets Naevius, Plautus, and Vergil, and the orators Grac- chus and Cato and Cicero, and others produced their work. Then Mixed, which emerged in the Roman state after the wide expansion of the Empire, along with new customs and peoples, corrupted the integrity of speech with solecisms and barbarisms.
8. All the nations of the East - like the Hebrews and the Syrians - crunch together their speech and words in their throats. All the Mediterranean nations - like the Greeks and the people of Asia Minor - strike their speech on the palate. All the Western nations - like the Italians and Spaniards - gnash their words against their teeth.
9. Syrian and Chaldean are close to Hebrew in speech, mostly agreeing in sound and in the pronunciation of their letters. But some think that Hebrew is Chaldean, because Abraham sprang from the Chaldeans. However, if this is accepted, how is it that the Hebrew children in the Book of Daniel (1:4) are ordered to be taught the Chaldean language, which they do not know? 10. Every human is able to pick up any human language - whether
Greek, or Latin, or that of any other nation - by hear- ing it, or to learn it by reading with a tutor. Although knowing all languages is difficult for anyone, yet no one is so indolent that, placed among his own peo- ple, he does not know the language of his own nation. Indeed, how else should such a one be considered but as worse than brute beasts? Beasts produce their own cries, and the human who is ignorant of his own language is worse.
11. It is hard to determine what sort of language God spoke at the beginning of the world, when he said (Gen- esis 1:3), "Be light made," for there were not yet any lan- guages. Or again, it is hard to know with what language he spoke afterwards to the outer ears of humans, espe- cially as he spoke to the first man, or to the prophets, or when the voice of God resounded in bodily fash- ion when he said (Mark 1:11), "Thou art my beloved Son." It is believed by some that the language in these places was that single one which existed before the diver- sity of tongues. As for the various language communi- ties, it is rather believed that God speaks to them in the same language that the people use themselves, so that he may be understood by them. 12. Indeed, God speaks to humans not through an invisible substance, but through a bodily creature, through which he even wished to appear to humans when he spoke. Now the Apostle says (I Corinthians 13:1), "If I speak with the tongues of men, and of angels." Here the question arises, with what tongue do angels speak? But Paul is saying this by way of exaggeration, not because there are tongues belonging to angels. 13. It is also asked with what lan- guage will humans speak in the future; the answer is nowhere to be found, for the Apostle says (1 Corinthians 13:8), "Or tongues shall cease."
14. We have treated languages first, and then nations, because nations arose from languages, and not languages from nations.
ii. The names of nations (De gentium vocabulis) 1. A nation (gens) is a number of people sharing a single origin, or distinguished from another nation (natio) in accordance with its own grouping, as the 'nations' of Greece or of Asia Minor. From this comes the term 'shared heritage' (gentilitas). The word gens is also so called on account of the generations (generatio) of fami- lies, that is from 'begetting' (gignere, ppl. genitus), as the term 'nation' (natio) comes from 'being born' (nasci,
ppl. natus). 2. Now, of the nations into which the earth is divided, fifteen are from Japheth, thirty-one from Ham, and twenty-seven from Shem, which adds up to seventy- three - or rather, as a proper accounting shows, seventy- two. And there are an equal number of languages, which arose across the lands and, as they increased, filled the provinces and islands.
3. The five sons of Shem each brought forth indi- vidual nations. The first of these was Elam, from whom descended the Elamites, princes of the Persians. The sec- ond Asshur, from whom sprang the empire of the Assyr- ians. The third Arpachshad, from whom the nation of the Chaldeans arose. The fourth Lud, from whom came the Lydians. The fifth Aram, from whom descended the Syrians, whose capital city was Damascus. 4. There are four sons of Aram, the grandsons of Shem: Uz, Hul, Gether, and Mash. Uz was the founder of Trachonitis - a principate between Palestine and Celesyria - from which came Job, as it is written (Job 1:1): "There was a man in the land of Uz." The second, Hul, from whom came the Armenians. The third, Gether, from whom came the Acarnanians or Curians. The fourth Mash, from whom descended those who are called Maeones. 5. The poster- ity of Arpachshad the son of Shem follows. The grand- son of Arpachshad was Heber (i.e. Eber), from whom descended the Hebrews. The son of Eber was Joktan, from whom the nation of the Indians arose. The son of Joktan was Sheleph, from whom came the Bactrians - although others suspect that these were Scythian exiles.
6.A son of Abraham was Ishmael, from whom arose the Ishmaelites, who are now called, with corruption of the name, Saracens, as if they descended from Sarah, and the Agarenes, from Agar (i.e Hagar). 7.A son of Ishmael was Nebaioth, from whom descended the Nabatheans, who live between the Euphrates and the Red Sea. 8. The sons of Lot were Moab and Ammon (i.e. Ben-ammi), from whom came the Moabites and the Ammonites. 9. The son of Esau was Edom, from whom descended the Edomites. These are the nations that descend from the
stock of Shem, holding the southern lands from the east to the Phoenicians.
10. There were four sons of Ham, from whom sprang the following nations. Cush, from whom the Ethiopians were begotten. Mesraim (i.e. Egypt), from whom the Egyptians are said to have risen. 11. Put, from whom came the Libyans - whence the river of Mauretania is called Put still today, and the whole region around it is called Puthensis. 12. Finally Canaan, from whom descended the Africans and the Phoenicians and the ten tribes of Canaanites. 13. Again, the sons of Cush, grandsons of Ham - the grandchildren of Ham were six. The sons of Cush: Saba (i.e. Seba), Havilah, Sab- tah, Raamah, Seba, and Cuza. 14. Saba, from whom the Sabaeans were begotten and named, concerning which Vergil (Geo. 2.117):
The bough of frankincense is the Sabaeans' alone.
These are also the Arabians. 15. Havilah, from whom descended the Getulians, who cling together in a desert region of farthest Africa. 16. Sabtah, from whom came the Sabathenes, who now are called the Astabarians. 17. But Raamah, Seba, and Cuza gradually lost their ancient names, and the names that they now have, instead of the ancestral ones, are not known. 18. The sons of Raamah were Saba (i.e. Sheba) and Dedan. This Saba is written in Hebrew with the letter shin, whereas the Saba above is written with a samekh, and from him the Sabaeans were named - but now Saba is translated "Arabia." 19. Dedan, from whom arose the Ethiopians in the western region.
The sons of Mesraim (i.e. Egypt): Lahabim, from whom came the Libyans, who formerly were called Putheans. 20. Casluhim, from whom sprang the Philistines, whom the ancients called %22ó??U2ot (lit. "foreigners"), and whom we now call, corruptly, Pales- tinians. 21. The other six nations are unknown because their past names fell into oblivion when they were over- thrown in the Ethiopian War.
22. There were eleven sons of Canaan, from whom descended the ten tribes of Canaanites, whose land the Jews occupied when the Canaanites were expelled. The firstborn of these was Sidon, from whom came the Sido- nians - whence also their city in Phoenicia is called
Sidon. 23. The second, Heth, from whom came the Het- hites. Third, Jebus, from whom descended the Jebusites, who possessed the city Jerusalem. Fourth, Emor, from whom came the Amorites. Fifth, Girgash, from whom the Girgashites. Sixth Hivah, from whom the Hivites. Those same were the Gibeonites, from the city of Gibeon, who came as suppliants to Joshua (Joshua 9:3-15). 24. Seventh, Arkah, who founded the city of Arcas oppo- site Tripoli, situated at the foot of Mount Lebanon. Eighth, Sinah, from whom the Sinites. Ninth Arvadah, from whom are the Arvadites, who occupied the island Aradum, separated by a narrow strait from the Phoeni- cian coastline. 25. The tenth, Zemarah, from whom came the noble city of Syria called Coeles. The eleventh, Hamath. These are the nations from the stock of Ham, which extend across the whole southern region from Sidon to the Gaditanian Strait (i.e. the Straits of Cadiz). Now the tribes of the sons of Japheth. 26. Seven sons of Japheth are named: Gomer, from whom sprang the Galatians, that is, the Gauls (Galli). 27. Magog, from whom people think the Scythians and the Goths took their origin. 28. Madai, from whom people reckon the Medes came to be. Javan, from whom the Ionians, who are also the Greeks - hence the 'Ionian' Sea. 29. Tubal, from whom came the Iberians, who are also the Spaniards, although some think the Italians also sprang from him. 30. Meshech, from whom came the Cappadocians; hence to this day a city in their territory is called Mazaca. 31. Tiras, from whom the Thracians; their name is not much altered, as if it were Tiracians.
32. Then the sons of Gomer, the grandsons of Japheth. Ashkenaz, from whom descended the Sarmatians, whom the Greeks call Rheginians. 33. Riphath, from whom came the Paphlagonians. Gotorna (i.e. Togarmah), from whom are the Phrygians. 34. The sons of Javan: Elishah, from whom came the Greek Eliseans, who are called Aeolides. Hence also the fifth language in Greece is called A"o2(c)ç ("Aeolic"). 35. Tarshish, from whom descended the Cilicians, as Josephus thinks. From his name their capital city is called Tarsus. 36. Kittim, from whom the Citians, that is the Cypriots, whose city today is named Citium. Dodanim (i.e. Rodanim), from whom came the Rhodians. 37. These are the nations from the stock of Japheth, which occupy the middle region of Asia Minor from Mount Taurus to the north and all of Europe up to the Britannic Ocean, bequeathing their names to both places and peoples.
Afterwards many of these names were changed, others remain as they were. 38. Indeed, the names for many nations have partially remained, so that their derivation is apparent today, like the Assyrians from Assur and the Hebrews from Heber (i.e. Eber). But partly, through the passage of time, they have been so altered that the most learned people, poring over the oldest his- torical works, have not been able to find the origin of all nations from among these forebears, but only of some, and these with difficulty. 39. Thus no original sound of the word remains to show that the Egyptians arose from the son of Ham named Mesraim (i.e. Egypt), or similarly with regard to the Ethiopians, who are said to descend from that son of Ham named Cush.
If all this is taken into account, there appear to be more names of nations that have been altered than names remaining, and afterwards a rational process has given diverse names to these. So the Indians were named from the river Indus, which bounds them on the western side.
40. The Serians (i.e. Chinese, or East Asians generally), a nation situated in the far East, were allotted their name from their own city. They weave a kind of wool that comes from trees, hence this verse (Courtney fr. 7):
The Serians, unknown in person but known for their cloth.
41. The Gangarides are a people between the Assyrians and the Indians, living around the Ganges River - hence they were named Gangarides. 42. The Hircanians are named for the Hircanian forest, where there are many tigers. 43. The Bactrians were Scythians who were driven from their territory by a faction of their own people. They settled by the river Bactron in the East, and derived their name from the name of the river. The king of this nation was Zoroaster, inventor of the art of magic. 44. The Parthians likewise take their origin from the Scythi- ans, for they were Scythian exiles, which is still evident from their name, for in the Scythian language exiles are called parthi. Like the Bactrians, after being driven by civil dissension from Scythia they first stealthily occu- pied the empty territory adjacent to the Hircanians, and then seized more land by force. 45. The Assyrians were named for Assur, the son of Shem - a very powerful nation, which held sway over the whole middle region between the Euphrates and the Indian border.
46. The Medes are thought to have been named after their king. Jason, brother of King Peliacus, was driven
by Pelias's children from Thessaly with his wife Medea. Jason's stepson was Medus, king of the Athenians, who after the death of Jason conquered the territory of the East. He founded there the city Media, and he named the nation of Medes after his own name. But in the Book of Genesis we find that Madai was the progenitor of the nation of Medes, and also that they were named for him, as was said above (section 28 above). 47. The Persians were named after King Perseus, who crossed into Asia from Greece and there dominated the barbarian nations with heavy and prolonged fighting. Right after his vic- tory he gave his name to the conquered people. Before Cyrus, the Persians were an ignoble people and consid- ered of no rank among the nations of the area. The Medes were always very powerful. 48. The Chasdeans, who are now called the Chaldeans, were named after Chesed, the son of Nahor, Abraham's brother. 49. The Sabaeans were named after the word osß?o9at, that is, "suppli- cate" and "worship," because we worship the divinity with Sabaeanincense. Theyarealsocalled Arabs, because they live in the mountains of Arabia called Libanus and Antilibanus, where incense is gathered. 50. The Syri- ans are held to be named from Surim (i.e. Asshurim), who was the grandson of Abraham from his wife Ketu- rah. The people whom the ancients called Assyrians we now call Syrians, making a whole name from the part.
51. The Hebrews were so named from Heber (i.e. Eber), the great-grandson of Shem. 52. The Israelites were named after Israel, the son of Isaac, for Israel was the patriarch of the Hebrews, and from him the twelve tribes of Jews were given the name of Israel. In the divi- sion of the kingdom his name was given to the Jews of the ten tribes, for before they were all called either Hebrews or Israelites. 53. However, from the time when the people of God were divided into two kingdoms, the two tribes that had kings from the stock of Judah were given the name of Jews (Iudaeus). The residue of ten tribes, who established a king for themselves in Samaria, kept the original name of Israel because of their large popula- tion. 54. The nation of the Samaritans took its origin from Assyrians who lived as immigrants in Samaria. In Latin their name means "guardians," because when the kingdom of Israel was taken captive the Samaritans were stationed in Israel's territory as a guard.
55. After Phoenix, the brother of Cadmus, moved from Egyptian Thebes to Syria, he reigned at Sidon and named
those people Phoenicians and the province Phoenicia after his own name. 56. Moreover, the Sidonites are thought to have drawn their name from the city called Sidon. 57. The Saracens are so called either because they claim to be descendants of Sarah or, as the pagans say, because they are of Syrian origin, as if the word were Syriginae. They live in a very large deserted region. They are also Ishmaelites, as the Book of Genesis teaches us, because they sprang from Ishmael. They are also named Kedar, from the son of Ishmael, and Agarines, from the name Agar (i.e. Hagar). As we have said, they are called Saracens from an alteration of their name, because they are proud to be descendants of Sarah.
58. Philistines are the same as Palestinians, because the Hebrew language lacks the letter p and uses the Greek phi in its place. Hence they say Philistine for Palestini- ans, expressly from the name of their city. They are also called Allophyli, that is, "of foreign descent," because they were always enemies of Israel and were set far apart from their race and society. 59. Canaanites were named after Canaan the son of Ham, and the Jews occupied their land. From this origin came Emor, the father of Sichem, for whom the Amorites were named. 60. The Egyptians were named after a certain King Aegyptus, whereas ear- lier they were called Aerians. In the Hebrew language 'Egyptians' means "afflicters," because they afflicted the people of God before they were liberated with divine assistance. 61. Armenius of Thessaly was one of Jason's generals who set out for Colchis with a gathered multi- tude that wandered here and there upon the loss of their king Jason. He founded Armenia, and gave that nation its name after his own name.
62. The Persian boundary, which divides the Scythi- ans from them, is named Scytha, and the Scythians are regarded by some people as having been named from that boundary-a nation always held to be very ancient. They were ancestors of the Parthians and Bactrians; fur- ther, Scythian women founded the kingdom of the Ama- zons. 63. The Massagetes are of Scythian origin, and they are called Massagetes because they are 'weighty,' that is, 'strong' Getae - for Livy speaks of silver as weighty, that is, as 'masses' (cf. massa, "mass"). They live in north-
ern regions between the Scythians and the Albanians.
64. The Amazons are so called either because they live together without men, as if the word were ?µa S?v ("liv- ing together"), or because they had their right breasts burnt off so that their shooting of arrows would not be hindered, as if it were ?v?U µaS?v ("without breasts"). Indeed, they would expose the breast that they had burned off. Titianus calls them 'One-Breasted' (Uni- mammae), for that is 'Amazon,' as if the term were ?v?U µaSou, that is, "without a breast." Amazons no longer exist, because they were wiped out partly by Hercules and partly by Achilles or Alexander.
65. The Scythian peoples in regions of Asia Minor, who believe that they are descendants of Jason, are born with white (albus) hair because of the incessant snow, and the color of their hair gave the nation its name - hence they are called Albanians. A blue-gray, that is, colored pupil is present in their eyes, so that they see better by night than by day. Also, the Albanians were neighbors of the Amazons. 66. The Hugnians were formerly called Huns, and afterwards - after the name of their king - Avars, and they first lived in farthest Maeotis, between the icy Tanais (i.e. the Don) and the savage peoples of the Massagetes. Then, with their nimble horses, they burst forth from the crags of the Caucasus, where Alexander's Gates had been keeping the fierce nations back. They held the East captive for twenty years, and exacted an annual tribute from the Egyptians and the Ethiopians.
67. The Trojan nation was formerly named the Darda- nian, from Dardanus. The brothers Dardanus and Jasius emigrated from Greece, and Jasius came to Thrace, Dar- danus to Phrygia, where he was the first ruler. After him succeeded his son Ericthonius, and then his grandson Tros, from whom the Trojans were named. 68. The Gala- tians are also known as the Gauls, and when they were called to the aid of the king of Bithynia they divided the kingdom with him when victory was attained. Then, mixed with the Greeks in this way, they were first called Gallogreeks, but now they are named Galatians after their ancient name of Galli (i.e. Gauls).
69. The Greeks were formerly named Thessalians, from Thessalus, and afterwards called Greeks, from King Graecus - for Greeks are properly Thessalians. 70. Fur- ther, people say that the Lapiths were a nation of Thessaly who once lived by the river Penios and were named after Lapitha, the daughter of Apollo. 71. The Greek nation of Sicyonians was named after King Sicyon. These were
first called Agialeans, after King Agealeus, who first ruled over the Sicyonians. The city of Agealea is named after him, and this is now called the Peloponnesus, after its king Pelops. These are also called Arcadians, named after King Arcas, the son of Jupiter and Callista. 72. The Danai were named after King Danaus. They are the same as the Argives, named after their founder Argos. After Apis, the king of the Greeks, died, his son Argos succeeded to the kingship, and the Argives were named after him. After his death he began to be regarded as a god by them, hon- ored with a temple and sacrifices. 73. The Achaians, also known as Achivians, were named after Achaeus, son of Jupiter. 74. The Pelasgians were so named because they seemed to have arrived in Italy in springtime with sails spread, like birds (cf. p?2apyóç, "stork"). Varro records their first landing in Italy. But the Greeks maintain that the Pelasgians were so called after the son of Jupiter and Larissa.
75. The Myrmidons were allies of Achilles, and the Dolopians of Pyrrhus. The Myrmidons were so called for their cleverness, as if the word were µápµ?m?ç, that is, "ants." But Eratosthenes says they are called Myr- midons after their leader Myrmido, son of Jupiter and Eurymedusa. 76. Cranaus succeeded to Cecrops, king of the Athenians; his daughter Atthis gave her name to the region and the nation. Also from her the Attic people were named, and they are the Athenians. 77. Ion was a powerful man, and he called those same Atheni- ans 'Ionians,' from his own name. 78. The Macedonians were earlier named the Emathians, after the name of King Emathio, and afterwards called Macedonians. 79. The Epiroteans were earlier named the Pyrrhideans after Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles, but afterwards after King Epirus.. . they ventured to cross over to Italy. 80. Dorus was the son of Neptune and Ellepis, whence the Dorians take their origin and their name. Moreover, they are a part of the Greek nation, and after them is named the third language of the Greeks, called Doric.
81. The Lacedaemonians are named from Lacedae- mon, the son of Semela. These people engaged for a long time in battle against the Messenians and, fearing that they would lose any hope of offspring because of the prolongation of the conflict, they commanded that their virgins should lie with the young men remain- ing at home. Thus, because of the promiscuous inter- course of these virgins, the youths, born of uncertain parentage, were named Spartans after the stigma of
their mothers' shame. The Spartans are the same as the Lacedaemonians.
82. The Thracians are thought to have descended and taken their name from the son of Japheth named Tiras, as was said above (section 31 above), although the pagans judge that they were named for their behavior, because they are ferocious (trux, gen. trucis). Indeed, they were the most savage of all nations, and many legends are recorded about them: that they would sacrifice captives to their gods, and would drink human blood from skulls. About them, Vergil (Aen. 3.44):
Alas, flee those cruel lands, flee that greedy coast -
as if it were the land of cruel and greedy people. 83. The Istrian nation originated from the Colchians, who were sent to hunt down the Argonauts. They went up the river Ister from the Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea), and thus they were called after the name of the river by which they left the sea.
84. The Romans were named after Romulus, who founded the city of Rome and gave his name to both nation and city. These people were earlier called Saturni- ans, from Saturn, and Latins, from Latinus - for Latinus was king of Italy, who named the Latins from his own name - and they afterwards were called Romans. They are also called Quirites, because Romulus is also named Quirinus, since he would always use a spear that in the language of the Sabines is called curis. 85. Also, Italus, Sabinus, and Sicanus were brothers, after whom names were given to both peoples and regions. From Italus, the Italians; from Sabinus, the Sabines; from Sicanus, the Sicani were named - these last were also named Siculi, that is, Sicilians. 86. The Tuscans (i.e. Etruscans) are a nation of Italy named for their frequent use of ritu- als and incense (tus), that is, from the word 9Uot?S?tv ("offer sacrifice").
87. The Umbrians are a nation of Italy, but they are the offspring of the ancient Gauls, and they inhabit the Apennine mountains. The histories maintain that because in a period of destructive flooding they sur- vived the rains they were called ï Oµßptot ("rain peo- ple") in Greek. 88. The Marsian nation of Italy is so called from Marsyas, the companion of Liber, who revealed the
practice of viticulture to them. Because of this they built a statue to him, which afterwards the Romans carried off when the Marsians had been conquered. Moreover, the Greeks call the Marsians 'Oscians,' as if it were ò??omot, because they had many serpents, and o??tç means "ser- pent." They are also said to be invulnerable to the sorcery of spells. Like the Umbrians they inhabit the region of the Apennine mountains. [The historian Alexander says, "Some say that the Volscians were named after Vulscus, son of Antiphates the Laestrygonian. Fabius also says that the Volscians migrated from the Sicolicians and were so called by a corruption of that name."] 
89. The Goths are thought to have been named after Magog, the son of Japheth, because of the similarity of the last syllable. The ancients called them Getae rather than Goths. They are a brave and most powerful people, tall and massive in body, terrifying for the kind of arms they use. Concerning them, Lucan (Civil War 2.54):
Let here a Dacian press forward, there a Getan (Getes) rush at the Iberians.
90. The Dacians were offshoots of the Goths, and people think they were called Dacians (Dacus) as if the word were Dagus, because they were begotten 'from the stock of the Goths' (de Gothorum stirpe). Concerning them, this verse (Paulinus of Nola, Poems 17.17):
You will go far, up to the northern Dacians.
91. The Bessians were a barbarian people who are thought to have been named after their great herds of cattle (bos). Concerning them, a certain poet (Paulinus of Nola, Poems 17.250):
He who lives in the middle of the land, or he who dwells by the river, rich with many cattle and wearing a felt cap.
92. The Gipedes used to go to war on foot (pedester) rather than on horseback, and they are so named for this reason.
93. The Sarmatians rode armed (armatus) over the open fields before Lentulus restrained them at the Danube, and from their enthusiasm for weaponry (arma) they are thought to have received the name Sarmatians. 94. They say that the Lanus is a river beyond the Danube, after which the Alani were named, just as the
people living by the river Lemannus (i.e. Lake Leman) are called Alemanni. About these, Lucan (Civil War 1.396):
They abandoned their tents pitched by the deep-channeled Lemannus.
95. The Langobards are commonly said to have been named for their beards (barba), long and never cut. 96. The river Vindilicus springs out from the far frontier of Gaul, and people maintain that the Vandals lived by it and got their name from it.
97. The Germanic (Germanicus) nations are so called because they are immense (immanis) in body, and they are savage (immanis) tribes hardened by very severe cold. They took their behavior from that same severity of cli- mate - fiercely courageous and ever indomitable, living by raiding and hunting. There are many tribes of Ger- mani, varied in their weaponry, differing in the color of their clothes, of mutually incomprehensible languages, and with uncertain etymologies of their names - such as the Tolosates, the Amsivari, the Quadi, the Tuungri, the Marcomanni, the Bruteri, the Chamavi, the Blangiani, the Tubantes. The monstrosity of their barbarism gives a fearsome quality even to their names.
98. The Suevi werea segment of the Germanic nation at the northern frontier. Of them, Lucan (Civil War 2.51):
(The Elbe and Rhine) pour the blond Suevi from the extreme north.
Many have reported that there were a hundred villages and communities of Suevians. The Suevi are thought to have been named from Mount Suevus, which forms the eastern boundary of Germania and whose territory they occupied. 99. Formerly, when the interior of Germania was subjected by the Romans, the Burgundianscoalesced into a large nation after being placed at the frontier-line of the Roman camps by Tiberius Caesar. Thus they drew their name from their location, because in their ver- nacular they call the dense settlements along the fron- tier 'forts' (burgus). Afterwards they rebelled against the Romans and, comprising more than eighty thousand armed men, they settled on the banks of the Rhine, and took the name of a nation. 100. The Saxon people, situ- ated on the shores of the Ocean in impassable marshes, are accomplished in strength and agility. Whence they were named (i.e. from saxosus, "stony"), because they are a hard and very powerful kind of people, standing out above the other piratical tribes.
101. The Franks (Franci) are thought to have been named after a certain chieftain of theirs. Others reckon that they were named for the brutality (feritas) of their behavior, for their behavior is wild, with a natural feroc- ity of spirit. 102. Some suspect that the Britons were so named in Latin because they are brutes (brutus). Their nation is situated within the Ocean, with the sea flowing between us and them, as if they were outside our orbit. Concerning them, Vergil (Ecl. 1.66):
The Britons, separated from the whole world.
103. The Scotti (Scottus, i.e. the Irish) in their own lan- guage receive their name from their painted (pictus; cf. the Picts) bodies, because they are marked by tattoos of various figures made with iron pricks and black pig- ment. 104. The Gauls (Galli) are named for the white- ness of their bodies, for in Greek milk is called y?2a. Whence the Sibyl speaks of them thus, when she says of them (Vergil, Aen. 8.660):
Then their milk-white necks are circled with gold.
105. People's faces and coloring, the size of their bod- ies, and their various temperaments correspond to vari- ous climates. Hence we find that the Romans are serious, the Greeks easy-going, the Africans changeable, and the Gauls fierce in nature and rather sharp in wit, because the character of the climate makes them so. 106. The Gauls were also called the Senones, and in ancient times the Xenones, because they offered hospitality to Liber (cf. (svoç, "guest"); afterwards the letter x was changed to s. 107. Vacca was a town near the Pyrenees, and the Vacceans were named after it. The poet is believed to have spoken about them (cf. Vergil, Aen. 4.42):
And the Vacceans ranging far.
They occupied the vast emptiness of the heights of the Pyrenees. They are the same people as the Vascones (i.e. the Basques), as if the word were Vaccones, with the let- ter c changed to s. 108. After he subdued Spain, Gnaeus Pompey, in his rush to come to his triumphal celebra- tion, drove them down from the heights of the Pyrenees and gathered them into one city. Hence the city took the name of 'Assembled Refugees' (Convenae, i.e. Saint- Bertrand de Comminges).
109. The Spanish were first named Iberians, after the river Iberus (i.e. the Ebro), but afterwards they were named Spaniards (Hispanus) after Hispalus (i.e. the
legendary founder of Hispalis, Seville). 110. The Gali- cians (Gallecus) were named for their whiteness (cf. y?2a, "milk") - and hence also the Gauls (Gallus) were named - for they are of whiter complexion than the other people of Spain. They claim a Greek origin for themselves, and hence are wise with a native wit. 111. They say that, after the Trojan War, Teucer was despised by his father Telamon because of the death of his brother Ajax. When he was not received into his kingdom, Teucer retired to Cyprus and there founded the city of Salamis after the name of his ancient homeland. From there he emigrated to Galicia, and when he had settled there he gave the name of the place to the nation. 112. The Astures are a nation of Spain, so called because they live along the river Astura, hedged in by mountains and thick forests.
113. The Cantabrians (Cantaber) are a nation of Spain named after the name of a city and the river Iberus (i.e. the Ebro) where they reside. They have a gritty spirit and are always as ready for brigandage and warfare as for enduring blows. 114. The Celtiberians descended from the Celtic Gauls, and from these names their district, Celtiberia, was named - for they were named Celtiberi- ans after the river Iberus of Spain, where they are settled, and after the Gauls, who were called Celtic, with the two terms combined.
115. The Africans were named for one of the descen- dants of Abraham, who was called Afer. He is said to have led an army against Libya and to have settled there after he had conquered the enemy, and his descendants were named Africans, and the place named Africa, after their ancestor. 116. The Punic people are the Carthaginians, named after the Phoenicians who emigrated with Dido.
117. The Tyrians were named after Tyre, the city of the Phoenicians, whence they emigrated and came to the African coast. 118. The Getulians are said to have been Getae who, setting out from their homeland with a huge force on ships, occupied the region of the Syrtes in Libya and were named by derivation Getulians, because they came from the Getae. Hence also the idea among the Goths is to speak of the Moors as close blood-relatives of themselves from their ancient affinity. 119. Thus Africa was held initially by the Libyans, then the Africans, and after this the Getulians, and finally the Moors and Numidians.
120. The Moors and Numidians - so the Africans believe - got their origin and name in the following way. After Hercules perished in Spain, his leaderless army,
composed of various nations, sought homes for them- selves in various places, and from this mass Medes and Persians and Armenians, having sailed across to Africa by ship, occupied the regions nearest the sea. 121. But the Persians, not finding wood in the fields for build- ing houses, and with communication inhibited by the unknown language, wandered through open fields and diverse deserts. In accordance with their itinerant for- aging they called themselves, in their own language, Numidians, that is, wandering and errant and without a city. 122. On the other hand, the Medes mingled with those Libyans who lived closest to Spain. Little by little the Libyans altered the name of these people, in their barbarous tongue calling the Medes 'Moors' (Maurus), although the Moors are named by the Greeks for their color, for the Greeks call black µaUpóç (i.e. ?µaUpóç, "dark"), and indeed, blasted by blistering heat, they have a countenance of a dark color.
123. Massylia is a city of Africa, not far from Mount Atlas and the gardens of the Hesperides. The Massylians were named after this city, and we now call them, with alteration, Massulians. Concerning them, Vergil (cf. Aen. 4.483):
Here a priestess of the Massylian people has been shown to me.
124. The nation of the Gaulalians consists of people wandering from the south up to the western Ocean. The island Gauloe gave them their name; it is next to Ethiopia, and no serpent is born or lives there. 125. Gara- mantes are a people of Africa living near the Cyreni- ans and named after the king Garamans, son of Apollo. He founded there the city named Garama after his own name. They are neighbors of the Ethiopian tribes. Con- cerning them, Vergil (Ecl. 8.44):
The farthest Garamantes.
And 'farthest,' because they are savage and remote from human fellowship. 126. The Hesperians are those who live alongside Spain, for Hispania is Hesperia (see XIV.iv.19).
127. Ethiopians are so called after a son of Ham named Cush, from whom they have their origin. In Hebrew, Cush means "Ethiopian." 128. This nation, which for- merly emigrated from the region of the river Indus, set- tled next to Egypt between the Nile and the Ocean, in the south very close to the sun. There are three tribes
of Ethiopians: Hesperians, Garamantes, and Indians. Hesperians are of the West, Garamantes of Tripolis, and the Indians of the East. 129. The Trochodites (i.e. Troglodytes) are a tribe of Ethiopians so called because they run with such speed that they chase down wild animals on foot (cf. tpoy?S?tv, "run quickly"; tpsy?tv, "run"). 130. The Pamphagians are also in Ethiopia. Their food is whatever can be chewed, and anything living that theycomeupon- whence they are named(cf. pav-,"all";
??ay?±v, "eat"). 131. Icthyophagians (cf. "y9uç, "fish"), who excel in fishing at sea and survive on fish alone. They occupy the mountainous regions beyond the Indians, and Alexander the Great conquered them and forbade them to eat fish. 132. Anthropophagians are a very rough tribe situated below the land of the Sirices. They feed on human flesh and are therefore named 'maneaters' (anthropophagus; cf. ?v9pYpoç, "man"). As is the case for these nations, so for others the names have changed over the centuries in accordance with their kings, or their locations, or their customs, or for whatever other rea- sons, so that the primal origin of their names from the passage of time is no longer evident.
133. Now indeed the people called Antipodes (i.e. "opposite-footed") - because they are thought to be con- trary to our footprints, as if from under the earth they make footprints upside-down from ours - are on no account to be believed in, because neither the solidity nor the central space of the earth allows this. Indeed this is not confirmed by any knowledge of history, but poets conjecture it as it were by sheer inference. 134. Moreover, they say that the Titans of Greece were a robust people of preeminent strength who, the fables say, were cre- ated by the angry Earth for her revenge against the gods.
135. Hence Titans are so called from the word t(c)otç, that is, 'revenge,' for they lived in arms as if for the sake of avenging Mother Earth against the gods. The fables feign that in war the Titans were overwhelmed by Jupiter and made extinct, because they perished from thunderbolts hurled from the sky.
iii. Reigns and terms for military matters (De regnis militiaeque vocabulis) 1.A reign (regnum) is so named from a king (rex, gen. regis), for as kings are so called from governing (regere), so reigns are called after the word for kings. 2. Every nation has had its own reign in its own times - like the Assyrians, the Medes, the Persians, the Egyptians, the Greeks - and fate has so
rolled over their allotments of time that each successive one would dissolve the former. Among all the reigns on earth, however, two reigns are held to be glorious above the rest - first the Assyrians, then the Romans - as they are constituted differently from one another in location as much as time. 3. For as one began first and the other later, so one was in the East, the other in the West. Indeed, the beginning of the latter came close upon the end of the former. Other reigns and other kings are considered mere appendices of these two.
4. Kings are so called from governing, and as priests (sacerdos) are named from 'sacrificing' (sacrificare), so kings (rex, gen. regis) from governing (regere, also mean- ing "keep straight, lead correctly"). But he does not gov- ern who does not correct (corrigere); therefore the name of king is held by one behaving rightly (recte), and lost by one doing wrong. Hence among the ancients such was the proverb: "You will be king (rex) if you behave rightly (recte); if you do not, you will not." 5. The royal virtues are these two especially: justice and mercy - but mercy is more praised in kings, because justice in itself is harsh.
6. Consuls (consul) are so called after 'taking coun- sel' (consulere), as kings from governing, laws (lex, gen. legis) from reading (legere). Because the Romans would not put up with the haughty domination of kings, they made a pair of consuls serve as the governing power year by year - for the arrogance of kings was not like the benevolence of a consul, but the haughtiness of a mas- ter. They were therefore called consuls either from their 'consulting the interests of ' (consulere) the citizens, or from their governing everything by consultation (con- silium). 7. Still, they elected new consuls each year so that a haughty one would not remain for long, but a more moderate one would quickly succeed to the office. Further, there were two with equal authority, for the one administered civil, the other military affairs. Con- suls governed over a period of 467 years. 8. Proconsuls were substitutes for consuls, and were called proconsuls because they would function in place of consuls, as a procurator does in place of a curator, that is, an agent.
9. Exconsuls were likewise so named because they had already passed on (exire) from the consulate, or because they had departed when the year of their term expired.
10. The Romans established dictators for themselves in the fifth year after the kings were expelled, when the son-in-law of Tarquinius gathered a huge army against Rome to avenge the injustice done to his father-in-law.
11. 
Dictators held power for five-year terms. They had more honor, then, than consuls, who held office for only a year. And they were called 'dictators' as if they were both leaders and teachers (i.e. givers of dictation) - hence they were named '(school)-masters (magister) of the people.' Also from them 'edicts' (edictum) are named. 12. The name of the Caesars began with Julius, who was the first of the Romans to achieve sole personal dominion after civil war had been stirred up. And Caesar was so called because he was brought forth and drawn out of his dead mother's womb, which had been 'cut open' (caedere, ppl. caesus), or because he was born 'with a head of hair' (caesarie). After him the successive emperors were called Caesars, because they had abundant hair. Those who were drawnout from awomb that has been cut open were called Caesones and Caesares. 13. He was furthermore called Julius because he took his origin from Julus, the son of Aeneas, as Vergil confirms (Aen. 1.288):
Julius, the name drawn from great Julus.
14. For the Romans, the title imperator was at first given only to those on whom supremacy in military affairs was settled, and therefore the imperatores were so called from 'commanding' (imperare) the army. But although generals held command for a long time with the title of imperator, the senate decreed that this was the name of Augustus Caesar only, and he would be distinguished by this title from other 'kings' of nations. To this day the successive Caesars have employed this title. 15. Indeed it is customary for later kings to use the name of the first one, as among the Albans all the kings of the Albans are called Silvii after the name of Sylvius; similarly for the Persians the Arsacidae, for the Egyptians the Ptolemies, for the Athenians the Cecropidae.
16. For the Romans, 'Augustus' is the name of the imperial office, because formerly the emperors 'enlarged' (augere) the republic by extending its borders. Originally the senate bestowed this name on Octavius Caesar, so that he might be honored in his very name and title for enlarging their territory. 17. Moreover, this same Octavius was now called Caesar and emperor, or Augustus. Afterwards, when it was announced to him while he was watching the games that he would also be called 'Lord' (Dominus) by the people, he immediately, by gesture and with face averted, repressed this indeco- rous adulation and, as a human being, declined the title of Lord. On the next day he rebuked the whole populace
with a very severe edict, and after this allowed no one to call him Lord, not even his own children. He was the son of Actia, who was the daughter of Julius Caesar's sister.
18. A king is called ßaot2?áç in Greek because like a pedestal's base (basis) he supports the people (cf. 2aóç, "people"). Hence pedestals also have crowns (i.e. their cornices), for the higher a person is placed in command, just so much heavier is the burden of his responsibilities.
19. Tyrants (tyrannus) in Greek are the same as 'kings' in Latin, because for the ancients there was no distinction between a king and a tyrant, as (Vergil, Aen. 7.266):
A condition of the peace for me will be to have touched the right hand of your ruler (tyrannus).
Strong kings were called tyrants, for a tiro is a strong young man. Of such people the Lord speaks, saying (cf. Proverbs 8:15): "By me kings reign, and tyrants (tyran- nus) possess the earth by me." 20. Now in later times the practice has arisen of using the term for thoroughly bad and wicked kings, kings who enact upon their peo- ple their lust for luxurious domination and the cruelest lordship.
21. The term 'prince' (princeps) is a mark of rank and also of precedence in time, as in this Vergilian line (Aen. 9.535):
Turnus was first (princeps) to hurl a burning torch,
where princeps means 'the first one.' Moreover, the term 'prince' derives from the sense of 'taking,' because he 'first takes' (primus capit), just as one speaks of a 'citizen of a municipality' (municeps) because he 'takes office' (munia capit). 22.A general (dux, gen. ducis) is so called because he is the 'commander' (ductor) of an army. But not everyone who is a prince or general can immediately be called a king. Moreover, in wartime it is better to be titled a general than a king, for the former title signifies the one in command in battle. Hence also Vergil (Aen. 10.370):
Of General (dux) Evander.
And Sallust (Histories 4.7 M): "For everyone is more eager to seem brave in front of the general." He did not say, "in front of the consul."
23. Monarchs (monarcha) are those who wield supreme power alone, like Alexander among the Greeks and Julius among the Romans. From this term also derives the word 'monarchy' (monarchia). In Greek
µov?ç is "singleness" and ?py? is "governing power."
24. Tetrarchs (tetrarches) are those who hold the fourth part of a kingdom, for tsttapa means "four." Such was Philippus in Judea. 25. The patricians (patricius) are so called because, as fathers (pater) watch over their chil- dren, so they watch over the state. 26. Prefects (praefec- tus) are so called because they 'preside' (praeesse) with praetorian (praetorius) power. 27. Praetors (praetor) are the same as prefects, as if the word were 'one placed in front' (praepositor). 28. Again, 'chief wardens' (prae- ses, i.e. provincial governors) are those who maintain the security of some location 'with chief custody' (prae- sidialiter). 29. Tribunes (tribunus) are so called because they dispense (tribuere) justice for soldiers or common people. 30. Chiliarchs (chiliarches) are those who pre- side over a thousand men; we call them millenarii, and the former term is Greek (i.e. yt2(c)apyoç). 31. Centurions are so called because they command a hundred (centum) soldiers; similarly quinquagenarii, because they are at the head of fifty (quinquaginta) soldiers, and decani, because they are set over ten (decem) soldiers.
32.A soldier (miles) is so called because formerly there were a thousand (mille) in one troop, or because one in a thousand was chosen. Romulus was the first to recruit soldiers from the populace and give them this name. Liber first taught military organization. 33. A soldier is called either a regular or an irregular. A regular (ordi- narius) soldier is one who fights within the 'rank and file' (ordo), and has not yet reached any rank of honor, for he is in the ranks, that is, of the humble militia. But an irregular (extraordinarius) soldier is one who is promoted beyond the rank and file on account of his valor. 34. Veteran and discharged soldiers who no longer serve in battle are called emeriti, because mereri means "to serve in the military," with reference to the wages that they earn (mereri). They are also called veterans (veteranus; cf. vetus, gen. veteris, "old") because they no longer serve in battle, but after their many trials as sol- diers they have attained the right to live in peace. 35. Cav- alrymen (equestri milites) are so called because they ride horses (equus), and they fight in the equestrian order.
36. An able-bodied young soldier is called a tiro (i.e. a new recruit), and such are enrolled for military service and serve as skilled in arms. They are appraised not by their professed age alone, but by their looks and phys- ical strength. Hence they are called tyros, and they are not soldiers until they have been approved by their oath
of allegiance. 37. The custom of the Roman army was that youths should first bear arms on reaching puberty, for tyros would begin to serve in their sixteenth year, though still at this age under instructors. Concerning them, Vergil (cf. Aen. 7.162):
And youths in their first flower.
38. Of course, slaves never served in the military unless they were freed - except at the time of Hannibal, when the Romans were in such straits after the battle of Cannae that there was no possibility of freeing slaves. 39. Desert- ers (desertor) are so called because they wander, leaving their military duties deserted (desertus). They are pro- hibited from enlisting in other troops of soldiers, but if their crime was of short duration, after they have been flogged they are restored to their own troop. But there are those who desert (deserere) the army and pass over to the enemy, and they are also called deserters.
40. Conscript soldiers are so called because they are enrolled in the muster list by the officer who will com- mand them, just as soldiers are called transcripts when they transfer from one legion to another - and hence transcript (transcriptus), because they give their names so that they may be transcribed (transcribere). 41. Adju- tants (optio) are so called, because they are selected, for optare means "select," as in this verse (Vergil, Aen. 3.109):
And he chose (optare) a site for the kingdom,
that is, he selected it. 42. Sentinels (excubitor) are so called because they always keep watch (excubia). They are members of a troop of soldiers who 'keep outdoor watch' (excubare) in sentry boxes as a royal guard. Excu- biae are daytime watches, and vigiliae are nighttime. Hence also the term 'sentinel' (vigil). 43. Skirmishers (veles) area type of fighter among the Romans, so called from their 'darting about' (volitare). Thus armed young men selected for their agility would ride seated behind mounted soldiers, and as soon as they encountered the enemy they would leap from the horses and now as foot soldiers would persistently harass the enemy while the mounted men who brought them would attack on the other side. Hannibal's elephants were once driven back by these skirmishers, and when their riders could not control them, the elephants were killed with a work- man's knife driven between their ears.
44. A camp is where a soldier would be stationed. It is called a camp (castra) as if it were 'chaste' (castus),
or because there sexual desire would be castrated (castrare)- fora woman never entereda camp. 45. 'Mil- itary service' (militia) is so called from 'soldiers' (miles, gen. militis), or from the word 'many' (multus), as if the term were multitia, being the occupation of many men, or from a mass (moles) of things, as if the word were moletia. 46. A legion (legio) is a troop of six thousand armed men, so called from 'selected' (eligere), as if it were 'picked out' (legere), that is, chosen for arms. Properly we speak of a phalanx of Macedonians, a 'band' (caterva) of Gauls, and a 'legion' (legio) of our (i.e. Roman) forces.
47. A legion has sixty centuries, thirty maniples, twelve cohorts, and two hundred squadrons.
48.A century (centuria) is a division of an army com- posed of a hundred (cf. centum, "hundred") soldiers. Hence those who command them are called centurions.
49. Reinforcements (subcenturiatus) are men not of the first, but of the second century, as if the word were 'below the first century' (sub prima centuria); nevertheless in battle they were formed up and placed inlookouts so that if the first century failed they, whom we have spoken of as the substitutes, would reinforce the first century in their efforts. Hence also a subcenturiatus would be stationed in ambush, as if he were trained in deceptive warfare (i.e. as sub can mean "secret"). 50.A maniple consists of two hundred soldiers. These troops are called maniples (manipulus) either because they would begin a battle in the first combat (manus), or because, before battle- standards existed, they would make 'handfuls' (manipu- lus) for themselves as standards, that is, bundles of straw or of some plant, and from this standard the soldiers were nicknamed 'manipulars.' Of them, Lucan (Civil War 1.296):
Straightway he rallies the armed maniples (maniplus) to the standards.
51. A squadron (turma) consists of thirty horsemen. There were three hundred Roman horsemen in one 'tribe' (tribus; see iv.7 below) and each group of one hundred would give ten to make up the squadron. A cohort has five hundred soldiers.
52. There are three kinds of military service: by oath, by call to arms, and by communal oath. 53. In service by oath (sacramentum) each soldier after his election swears not to quit his service until after his hitch has been completed, that is, his period of service - and those are the ones who have a full service record, for they
are bound for twenty-five years. 54. By 'call to arms' (evocatio), when not only soldiers but also other people are called out (evocare) to a sudden battle. At such a time a consul would say, "He who wants the republic to be preserved, follow me." 55. By 'communal oath' (coniuratio): this is done when there is an uprising, and the city's imminent peril leaves no time for individuals to take an oath, but a multitude is suddenly assembled and is kindled into tumultuous wrath. This is also called an uproar (tumultuatio).
56. In a battle array these are the usual formations: an army, a levy, a knot, a wedge, the wings, the horns, a col- umn. These borrow their shapes and their names from the objects from which the terms have been derived. 57. The 'battle array' (acies; also meaning "cutting edge") is so called because it is armed with iron and the sharpness (acumen) of swords. 58. An army (exercitus) is a multi- tude of one kind, so called from its training (exercitatio) for war. 59. A wedge (cuneus) is a company of soldiers gathered into one place. Hence, because it assembles in one place, this 'gathering in one place' (coitio in unum) is named a cuneus, as if the word were couneus, because all are assembled in one place. 60. Levies (classis, also mean- ing "fleet") are so called because they are segments of an army; later these were called maniples. Hence Vergil (cf. Aen. 2.30):
Here the site for the divisions (classis), here the battle arrays (acies) would fight.
Nowadays classis also means a fleet (classicum) of ships.
61. A knot (nodus) properly is a dense crowd of foot soldiers, as a squadron (turma) is of cavalry. It is called a 'knot' for its intricacy, because it can scarcely be loos- ened. 62. The wings of an army are said to be thirty cav- alrymen. The cavalry are called the wings (ala) because they cover the foot soldiers in the manner of wings. 63. The troops of an army who are farthest out are called horns (cornu), because their line is curved. 64. It is called a column (agmen) when an army marches, named from 'driving' (agere), that is, going. Plautus (The Haunted
House 562): "Where are you going (agere)?" Thus it is an army on the march. It is called a column because it is arranged in a file, as it would be when an army passes through gates. In any other sense the term is used incor- rectly.
iv. Citizens (De civibus) 1. We have spoken somewhat about reigns and military terms, and now we add a sum- mary of terms for citizens. 2. Citizens (civis) are so called because they live 'assembled' (coire) in one body, so that their common life might be made richer and safer. 3. A house is the dwelling place of a family, as a city is the dwelling place of a single populace, and as the world is the domicile of the whole of humankind. But 'house' also refers to a lineage, a family, or the union of husband and wife. A house (domus) originates with these two (duo), and the term is Greek (i.e. 6óµoç, or 6?µa, "house, household, family"). A familia consists of the children of free parents legally begotten from the loins (femur). 
4. A 'race' (genus) is so called from begetting (gignere, ppl. genitus) and procreating (progenerare), or from the delimiting of particular descendants (prognatus), as are nations (natio) that, delimited by their own kinships, are called 'stocks of people' (gens). 5.A populace (popu- lus) is composed of a human multitude, allied through their agreed practice of law and by willing association. A populace is distinct from the plebeians (plebs), because a populace consists of all the citizens, including the elders of the city. [But the plebeians are the remaining people apart from the elders of the city.] 6. Therefore the popu- lace is the whole city, but the common people are the ple- beians. The plebeians are named for their plurality (plu- ralitas), for there are more people of lesser status than there are elders. The populace is called the ooUyvaµotç, that is, ottoaotç, and hence the term populus. In Greek the populace is called 2aóç, from the term 'stone' (lapis; cf. Greek 2?aç, "stone"). The 'common people' (vulgus) is the multitude living here and there - as if it were "each one where he wishes (vult, from velle, "wish")."
7. The separate courts and assemblies of the people are called tribes (tribus), and they are so called because in the beginning the Romans had been separated by Romulus 'into three groups' (trifarie): senators, soldiers, and plebeians. Although the tribes are now multiplied, they retain their original name. 8. Its members' age gave the senate (senatus) its name, because they were seniors (senior). Others have it that senators are so called from
permitting (sinere), because they grant the means for doing something. 9. A 'senate resolution' (senatuscon- sultum) is so called from consulting (consulere) and deliberating, because it is rendered in such a way that it consults interests, and cannot cause harm. 10. Indeed, senators are called fathers (pater), as Sallust says (War with Catiline 6), from their similar responsibilities, for just as fathers tend to their children, so the senators would tend to the republic. 11. 'Enrolled fathers' (patres conscripti) were so called because when Romulus chose the ten curial districts of the senators he set down their names on golden tablets in the presence of the populace, and hence they were called enrolled fathers.
12. The first ranks of senators are called the illustres (lit. "illustrious"), the second, the spectabiles ("notable"), and the third, the clarissimi ("distinguished"). There is no fourth type lower than these. Although a person might be of senatorial birth, he was called a Roman equestrian (eques) until the lawful age, and then he would receive the honor of the senatorial office.
13. There were 'censors' among the ancient Romans. The term censor applies to a judicial office, because censere means "judge." Likewise, censors are the arbiters of inherited estates, so called from the 'counting of money' (census aeris). 14. Judges (iudex, gen. iudicis) are so called as if it were 'those speaking the law' (ius dicens) to the people, or because they 'lawfully decide' (iure dis- ceptare). To examine lawfully is to judge (iudicare) justly, and a person is not a judge if justice is not in him. 15. Presidents (praeses) are governors of provinces, so called because they preside (praeesse). 16. The office of praetor (praetor) is named as if it were 'teacher' (praeceptor) and 'chief person' (princeps) of the city. Likewise quaestors (quaestor), as if the word were quaesitor ("investigator"), because they preside over examinations (quaestio) at tri- als, for the deliberations and judicial process are in their hands.
17. The proceres are the leading men of a city, as if the word were procedes (i.e. "those going before"), because they 'take precedence' (praecedere) before all others in esteem. Hence also the tips of the beams that protrude beyond the walls are called proceres, because they 'come out' (procedere) first. Therefore, a transfer of sense was made in applying the term to the leading men, because they jut out beyond the multitude of others. 18. Tribunes (tribunus) are so called because they grant (tribuere) either legal process or aid to the common people. That
office was established in the sixth year after the kings (i.e. of Rome) were driven out, for when the common people were oppressed by the senate and consuls they created for themselves tribunes to act as their own judges and defenders, to safeguard their liberty and defend them against the injustice of the nobility. Hence they (i.e. municipal magistrates) are also called defensores, because they defend (defendere) the common people entrusted to them against the arrogance of the wicked. But now, on the contrary, we have not defenders but destroyers.
19. Those who convey the public funds (nummus) to the treasuries (aerarium) are therefore called numerarii.
20. Functionaries (functus) are so called because they perform (fungi, ppl. functus) an office and some offi- cial charge. Hence we call those dead people who have completed their life's function 'the defunct' (defunctus)- for now they do nothing. 21. Fellow-citizens (municeps, particularly a "municipal officer") are those born in the same municipality, so called from their service in their offices, because they take on(accipere) public offices - for munia are public offices. Hence people who assume no official duty are called 'immune' (immunis). 22. Munici- pal officers (municipalis) are citizens native to a place and holding office there. 23. Decuriones are so called because they are of the curial order, and hold office in the curia. Hence a person who has not paid the sum or participated in the curia is not a decurio. 24. Curiales are the same as decurions, and they are called curiales because they 'have charge of ' (procurare) and carry out civic duties. 25. Prin- cipales, magistrates, and duumvirs are orders of curial offices. Principales are so called because they are first (primus), above the magistrates. 26. Magistrates (magis- tratus), because they are greater (maior, comparative of magnus) than the other offices. Duumvirs. . .
27. A notary (tabellio) is so called because he is the carrier of writing tablets (tabella). The same person is called a copyist (exceptor), and a 'public scribe' (scriba publicus), because he writes down (scribere) only those things that are published (publicare) in the records of transactions. 28. Burghers (burgarius) are so called from 'fortified villages' (burgus), because in common speech people call the many dwelling-places established along
the frontiers burgi. Hence also the nation of Burgundians got their name: formerly, when Germania was subdued, the Romans scattered them among their camps, and so they took their name from these places. 29. Collegiati are so called because they are removed from their board of officials (collegium) and their responsibilities, because they have committed a crime. The vilest class of people are those born of an unidentified father.
30. Private citizens (privatus) are those not holding public offices. The title is the opposite of that for one holding a magistracy, and they are called privati because they are free from the offices of the curia (cf. privare, "set free"). 31. Mercenaries (mercennarius) are those who serve for pay (merces). They are also called by the Greek term barones, because they are strong in difficult cir- cumstances, for ßapáç means "heavy," that is, strong. Its contrary is 'light,' that is, weak. 32. 'Publican' (pub- licanus) is the title for the farmers of the taxes of the public treasury, or of public (publicus) affairs, or for those who exact the public taxes, or for those who chase profits through the business of the world - hence their name. 33.A vilicus is properly the manager of a 'country estate' (villa), whence the vilicus takes his name from villa. Yet sometimes vilicus does not signify the man- agement of a country estate, but, according to Cicero, the oversight of all the household business, that is, he is overseer of all the property and estates. 34. Agents (actor, "prosecutor") and administrators (curator) are so called from 'acting for' (agere, ppl. actus) and 'car- ing for' (curare). 35. Procurators are those who serve in place of curatores, as if the term were 'in place of caretak- ers' (propter curatores), like proconsul, 'for the consul' (pro consule).
36. Colonists (colonus) are settlers (cultor) froma for- eign country, so called from the cultivation (cultura) of fields. There are people coming from elsewhere and tilling (colere, ppl. cultus) a foreign field that they have leased, and they owe their condition to the fruitful soil, because of their tillage of the land under the control of
the owner, inasmuch as an estate was leased to them. We speak of four types of colonists: Roman, Latin, aux- iliary, or colonists of the private countryside. 37. Tenants (inquilinus) are so called as if it were 'residents of others' property' (incolentes aliena), for they have no place of their own, but live on alien land. 38. There is this dif- ference between a tenant and a 'resident alien' (advena): tenants are people who emigrate, and do not remain permanently, whereas we speak of resident aliens or immigrants (incola) as coming from abroad but settling permanently - hence the term incola, for those who are now inhabitants, from the word 'reside' (incolere).
39. Indigenous people (indigena) are those 'therefrom begotten' (inde genitus), born in the same place in which they live. 40. The term incola signifies not an indigenous person, but a resident alien.
41. Foreigners (peregrinus) are so called because the parents from whom they come are not known (cf. parentes ignorari). 42. People who lived in Rome were called urbani, but those who live in other towns are oppi- dani, because the only 'city' (urbs) is Rome, and the oth- ers are towns (oppidum). 43. Famuli are those who were born of one's own household of slaves. Slaves (servus) got their name from this, that those who could have been killed by the victors according to the law of war, when they were 'preserved alive' (servare), were made servi, and thus 'slaves' were named from 'preserving.'
44. Handmaids (ancilla) were so called from 'support,' for in Greek ?ymÛv means "elbow." Hence we also use the word ancon. 45. 'Estate property' (mancipium) is whatever can be 'taken by hand' (manu capere) and sub- jected, like a human, a horse, or a sheep, for these living beings, as soon as they are born, are reckoned as estate property. Likewise those creatures from the world of wild beasts are considered as estate property as soon as they are captured or tamed.
46. A freeman (ingenuus) is so called because he has freedom by birth (genus), not from a legal action like freedmen. Hence the Greeks call such a one ?ùy?v?ç (lit. "well-born") because he is of good birth. 47. A freed- man (libertus) was so called as if the word were liberatus ("liberated"), for at an earlier time he was consigned to the yoke of slavery. In antiquity the son of a freedman was called libertinus, as if the term were de liberto natus ("born from a freedman"). But now, libertinus refers to one who was freed by a freedman, or his possession. 48. A 'manumitted man' (manumissus) is so called as if the
term were manu emissus ("delivered by a hand"), for in ancient times whenever they would liberate (manumit- tere) someone they would turn him around after he was struck with a slap and confirm him to be free. From this, they were said to be 'manumitted' because they were delivered by a hand. 49. A dediticius (i.e. a surrendered captive) was first named after the word deditio ("surren- der"), the word used when conquered or about to be conquered enemies hand themselves over to the victors. This was the origin of the word dediticius: once, when slaves took up arms and fought against the Roman peo- ple, they were defeated and 'gave themselves up' (se dare, perfect tense dedi), and they were arrested and were pun- ished with various marks of shame. 50. For this reason, when at a later time some of them were manumitted by their masters, they did not attain the standing of Roman citizens, on account of the marks of punishment that they had manifestly experienced.
51. Among the Latins, before Rome was founded, peo- ple were made free when they took up their freedom by a letter, never by a will. Thus, because they did not become free througha will, they were not able to acquire anything by a will or to designate heirs. They were later, under the consuls, made Roman citizens by wills in the city of Rome. 52. They were called Roman citizens because they were brought into the number of Roman citizens by being made free by means of a will. Permission to dwell in the city of Rome was granted to them from the first, but when others were made freedmen there was a prohibition against their remaining either in Rome or within seven miles of the city.
v. Family relationships and their degrees (De adfini- tatibus et gradibus) 1. Property consisting of money (aes, gen. aeris) provided the word for 'heir' (heres), for the heir is the executor for the testator's payments. Indeed, by this word heres is meant the first succession of inheritance and family, such as children and grand- children. 2.A pro-heir (proheres) is someone who acts in place of an heir, as though the term were 'for an heir' (pro
+ heres). The proheres is either appointed as heir or made
a secondary heir. 3.A father (pater) is the one from whom
the beginning of the line springs, and thus, he is called the paterfamilias. Moreover, a father is so called because he engenders a son when patratio has been performed, for patratio is the consummation of sexual intercourse. Lucretius says (cf. On the Nature of Things 4.1129):
The well-done begettings (patra) of fathers. 
4. The term progenitor (genitor) comes from the verb 'engender' (gignere, ppl. genitum), and parents (parens) are so called as though they were 'begetters' (parere, present participle pariens). 5. They are also 'creators' (creator). Crementum (lit. "growth") is the word for the male seed, from which the bodies of animals and humans are conceived; hence parents are creators. 6. A mother is so named because something is made from her, for the term 'mother' (mater) is as if the word were 'matter' (materia), but the father is the cause.
7. The 'paterfamilias' is so called, because he takes care of the slaves placed in his household (familia), just as a father directs his children, with paternal affection. And he does not distinguish in his affection the condition of the slaves from that of his children, but embraces them all as though they were a single unit. This is the origin of the word 'paterfamilias.' Those who lord it over their slaves in an unfair manner could never reckon themselves to be called by this term. 8. The 'materfa- milias' is so called because she has crossed over into the
'household of her husband' (maritus + familia) through a certain procedure of law, and the matrimonial regis-
ters are the records of her purchase. In another man- ner, just as matron (matrona) is a name for the mother of a first child, that is, as though the term were the mater nati ("mother of one born"), so the 'materfa- milias' is the woman who has borne several children - for a family (familia) comes into existence from two people.
9. A grandfather (avus) is a father's father, so called from 'age' (aevus), that is, from 'antiquity.' A great- grandfather (proavus) is the grandfather's father, as though he were 'close to the grandfather' (prope + avus). A great-great-grandfather (abavus) is the great- grandfather's father, who is now far way 'from the grand- father' (ab + avus). 10. A great-great-great-grandfather (atavus) is the great-great-grandfather's father. 10. A great-great-great-great-grandfather (tritavus) is the father of a great-great-great-grandfather, as if the word were tetravis, that is, the 'fourth beyond the grandfather" (cf. t?tpa-, "four"). But tritavus is the last name given to this line of kinship; a family arises with the father, and ends with the great-great-great-great-grandfather.
11. Son (filius) and daughter (filia) are named after the family (familia); for they are first in the order of descent. Hence with regard to the Cornelian family, the whole stock arose from Cornelius. 12. 'Family' comes from the word 'loins' (femur; see iv.3 above, with note), for a race of people and its lineage appear from their ancestral loins (femur). The word familia is used metaphorically for slaves, and not with its proper application. 13.A family's lineage (stirps, "stock," lit. "stalk") is so called from its longstanding designation based on birth. A son (gnatus) is so called because he has been generated (generatus); whence the word is spelled with a g. Offspring (suboles) are so named for their 'taking the place' (substitutio) of the previous generation.
14. The birth-order of children is designated in four ways: only-born (unigenus), first-born (primogenitus), middle (medius), and last (novissimus). The first-born is so named because no child was born before him. The only-born is so called when no child is born after him. The middle child is between all the others, and the last comes after all the others; this same child is the 'littlest' (minimus), from the word 'monad' (monas). The last- born is so called because he is recent (novus), since the remaining siblings are older because they came first. 15. Children (filius) are designated in four ways: by nature, by imitation, by adoption, and by instruction. Children by nature (natura), as when the Jews are called the chil- dren of Abraham. Children by imitation (imitatio), as those gentiles who imitated (imitare) the faithfulness of Abraham, as when the Gospel says (Luke 3:8) "God is able of these stones to raise up children to Abraham," or as when the Lord says that these same Jews are the children of the devil, from whom they are not born, but whom they have imitated (John 8:44). 16. Children also by adoption (adoptio), the kind everyone is famil- iar with in human society, or as we address God "Our Father, who art in heaven," as our father by adoption, not nature. Children by instruction (doctrina), as when the apostle Paul called those to whom he preached the Gospel "his own children."
17. When children are called liberi ("children"; lit. "free") in a legal sense, it is so that by this term they are distinguished from slaves, because just as a slave is in the power of his master, so a child (filius) is in the power of his father. Thus, 'emancipation' occurs for the son, so that he is free from his father, just as 'manu- mission' occurs for a slave, so that he is liberated from
his master. 18. Again, children are called liberi when they have sprung from a free (liber) marriage, for the children of a free man and a slave serving-girl have slave status, as children who are so born always assume the status of the lower parent. 19. 'Natural children' (naturalis) means those belonging to freeborn concubines, whom nature alone begot, not the chastity of marriage. The word 'boy' (puer) comes from 'the signs of puberty' (pubes). 20. An 'adoptive son' (adoptivus) is one who has been handed into the power of another through 'transfer of property' (mancipatio) - either by his rightful father, or grandfa- ther, or great-grandfather, in whose power he was - and who then bears the name of both, like Fabius Aemilius, or Scipio Paulinus.
21. Twins (gemini) are not only two who are born at the same time, but also more than two. If one of the twins is miscarried, the other, who has been properly born, is given the name 'Vopiscus.' 22. A child is called 'posthumous' (posthumus) because is he born after the burial (post + humatio) of his father, that is, after his death. This son takes the name of his dead parent, for so the law wills it, that he who is born from a deceased father
is called by the name of the deceased. 23. One is called nothus (lit. "one born out of wedlock") who is born from a noble father and from an ignoble mother, for instance a concubine. Moreover, this term is Greek (i.e. vó9oç) and is lacking in Latin. 24. Opposite to this is a spurius son, one who is born from a noble mother and an ignoble father. Again, the spurius son is born from an unknown father and from a widowed mother, as if he were the son of a spurium only - for the ancients termed the female generative organs spurium, as though the term derived from the term opópoç, that is, "seed" - and he has no name from his father. 25. Such children were also called Favonii, because certain animals are thought to conceive by receiving a draft from the Favonian (i.e. west) wind. Hence those children who are not born of legitimate wedlock follow the condition of the mother rather than the father. In Latin the word spurius is as if the term were extra puritatem ("apart from purity"; cf. the prefix se-, "apart from"), that is, as if unclean.
26. A grandchild (nepos) is one who is born from a son. A grandchild is so called as though the term were natus post ("born afterward"), for first the son is born, and then the grandchild. It is the degree of relationship of the secondary heir. From this we also get the word 'posterity' (posteritas), as though the term
were postera aetas ("later age"). The word nepos refers to either sex, for the reason that we speak of a nep- tis ("granddaughter") in legal use is because of the acknowledged distinction in matters of succession. 27. A great-grandson is the child who is conceived and born from the grandson, and he is called pronepos as if the term were natus porro post ("born further after"). From this degree on the offspring begin to be called the progeny (progenies), as if porro post geniti ("begotten further after"). The children and grandchildren do not count as 'progeny' because they have no long period of descent.
28. Just as those born rather far down the line of descent are called progeny, so those further up, the great-grandfathers and great-great-grandfathers, are also called 'progenitors' (progenitor), as if the term were porro generans ("remote begetter"). A great-grandson (pronepos) is so called because he is prope nepotem ("near the grandson"). 29. The great-great-grandson (abnepos), because he is separated 'from the grandson' (a nepote), for the pronepos is between him and the nepos. The adnepos is the son of an abnepos. 30. The trinepos is the son of the adnepos, because he is fourth in line after
the nepos - as if the word were tetranepos ("fourth" +
"grandson"). 31. We do not speak of 'descendants'
(minor) except where a name for a degree of kinship is lacking - such names as son, grandson, great-grandson, great-great-grandson, great-great-great-grandson, and great-great-great-great-grandson. Where there are no more such terms for degrees we rightly speak of 'descen- dants,' just as we speak of 'ancestors' (maior) beyond the terms for father, grandfather, great-grandfather, great-great-grandfather, great-great-great-grandfather, and great-great-great-great-grandfather.
vi. Paternal and maternal relatives (De agnatis et cog- natis) 1. 'Paternal kin' (agnatus) are so called because they 'succeed in place of children' (accedere pro natis) when there are no sons. Hence they are acknowledged as taking precedence in the lineage, because they issue from people of the male sex, such as a brother begotten by the same father, or a brother's son or grandson, or a paternal uncle. 2. 'Maternal kin' (cognatus) are so called because they are also linked by nearness of kinship (cog- natio). Maternal kin are considered as after the paternal kin because they issue from people of the female sex, and are not paternal kin, but are related otherwise by
natural law. 3. The 'next of kin' (proximus) is so called because of closeness (proximitas) of blood. 4. 'Blood- relatives' (consanguineus) are so called because they are conceived from one blood (sanguis), that is, from one seed of a father. A man's seed is a froth of blood that looks like water dashed against cliffs and making a white froth, or like dark wine that makes a whitish foam when shaken in a cup. 5. Brothers (frater) are so called because they are of the same fruit (fructus), that is, born of the same seed. 6. However, 'maternal brothers' (germanus) are those issuing from the same mother (genetrix) and not, as many say, from the same seed (germen); only the latter are called fratres. Therefore fratres issue from the same fruit, and germani from the same mother. 7. Uter- ine (uterinus) brothers are so called because they have issued from different fathers but from a single womb (uterus), for only a woman has a womb.
8. In the Divine Scriptures brothers are referred to in four ways: in nature, in nation, in lineage, and in affec- tion. In nature, as Esau and Jacob, Andrew and Peter, James and John. In nation, as all Jews are called broth- ers of each other in Deuteronomy (cf. 15:12): "If you obtain your brother (frater), who is a Hebrew man." And the Apostle says (Romans 9:3-4): "I wished myself to be an anathema from Christ, for my brethren (frater), who are my kinsmen according to the flesh, who are Israelites." 9. Further, people may be called brothers by lineage when they are of one family, that is, one native land. Latin speakers use the word 'paternity' (paternitas) when many groups of a race spread from a single root. In Genesis, Abraham said to Lot (cf. 13:8): "Let there be no quarrel between me and thee, and between my herds- men, and thy herdsmen: for we are all brethren (frater)." Surely Lot was not Abraham's brother, but the son of his brother Aram. 10. In the fourth way, brothers are so called in affection, and this has two types: spiritual and general. In spiritual brotherhood, by which all of us Christians are called brothers, as (Psalm 132:1 Vulgate): "Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren (frater) to dwell together in unity." In general brother- hood, because all humans, born from one father, are joined in equal kinship among ourselves, as Scripture says (cf. Isaiah 66:5): "Say to those that hate you: you are our brothers (frater)."
11. The term 'maternal sister' (germana) is understood just as 'maternal brother' (germanus), as issuing from the same mother. 12. And 'sister' (soror) is understood in the same sense as 'brother.' Thus, 'sister' is the name for a person of the same seed, because only she is considered as belonging to the portion (sors) of the paternal her- itage with the brothers. 13. 'Paternal first-cousins' (frater patruelis) are so called because their fathers (pater) were brothers (germanus). 14. But 'first cousin' (consobrinus) is the name for those born from a sister (soror) and a brother, or from two sisters, as if the word were con- sororinus. 15. Fratruelis is the child of one's mother's sis- ter. 'Second-cousins' (sobrinus) are the children of first- cousins. Tius is a Greek word (i.e. 9?±oç, "uncle"). 16. 'Paternal uncle' (patruus) is the brother of one's father, as if the term were pater alius ("another father"). Hence when the father of a minor dies, the paternal uncle adopts him and cares for him as his own son as he is obliged by law.
17. A 'maternal uncle' (avunculus) is the brother of one's mother, and the term appears to have the form of a diminutive, because it shows signs of coming from the word avus ("grandfather"). 18.A 'paternal aunt' (amita) is the sister of one's father, as though the term were alia mater ("another mother"). A 'maternal aunt' (mater- tera) is the sister of a mother, as if mater altera ("a sec- ond mother"). A father-in-law (socer) is one who has given his daughter in marriage. 19.A son-in-law (gener) is one who marries the daughter, and he is so called because he is taken into the family (genus, gen. generis) for its increase. A father-in-law - or a mother-in-law (socrus) - is so called because they ally (adsociare) to themselves a son-in-law or daughter-in-law (nurus). 20. A stepfather (vitricus) is one who takes a wife who has a son or daughter from another man. He is so called as though the word were novitricus, because the mother marries a new (novus) husband.
21. A stepson (privignus) is one who was born from another father, and he is thought to be called privignus as though the word were privigenus, because he was 'born at an earlier time' (prius genitus). Whence, a stepson is
commonly called antenatus ("born before"). 22. These are words that appear to be derived from the word for family (gens): genitor, genetrix, agnatus, agnata, cognatus, cognata, progenitor, progenitrix, germanus, germana.
23. More on the aforementioned relationships (Item de praedictis affinitatibus) The originator of my birth is my father, and I am his son or daughter. The father of my father is my grandfather (avus), and I am his grandson (nepos) or granddaughter (neptis). The grandfather of my father is my great-grandfather (proavus), and I am his great-grandson (pronepos) or
-daughter (proneptis). The great-grandfather of my father is my great-great-grandfather (abavus) and I am his great-great-grandson (abnepos) or -daughter (abneptis). The great-great-grandfather of my father is my great-great-great-grandfather (atavus), and I am his great-great-great-grandson (adnepos) or -daughter (adneptis).	The	great-great-great-grandfather	of my father is my great-great-great-great-grandfather (tritavus), and I am his great-great-great-great-grandson (trinepos) or -daughter (trineptis).
24. Paternal uncles (De patruis) The brother of my father is my paternal uncle (patruus), and I am the son or daughter of his brother. The father of my paternal uncle is my 'great uncle' (pater magnus), and I am the son or daughter of his brother's son or daughter. The grandfather of my paternal uncle is my great-great-uncle (propatruus), and I am the grandson or granddaugh- ter of his son or daughter. The great-grandfather of my paternal uncle is my great-great-great-uncle (adpa- truus), and I am the son or daughter of his grandson or granddaughter.
25. Paternal aunts (De amitis) The sister of my father is my paternal aunt (amita), and I am the son or daugh- ter of her brother. The mother of my paternal aunt is my 'great paternal aunt' (amita magna), and I am the son or daughter of her brother's son or daughter. The grand- mother (avia) of my paternal aunt is my great-great- paternal aunt (proamita) and I am the son or daughter of her grandson or granddaughter. The great-grandmother (proavia) of my paternal aunt is my great-great-great paternal aunt (abamita) and I am the son or daughter of her grandson or granddaughter.
26. Maternal uncles (Deavunculis) The brother ofmy mother is my maternal uncle (avunculus), and I am the son or daughter of his sister. The father of my maternal uncle is my maternal great uncle (avunculus magnus)
and I am the son or daughter of his son or daughter. The grandfather of my maternal uncle is my great-great- uncle (proavunculus) and I am the grandson or grand- daughter of his son. The great-grandfather of my mater- nal uncle is my great-great-great uncle (abavunculus) and I am the son or daughter of his granddaughter.
27. Maternal aunts (De materteris) The sister of my mother is my maternal aunt (matertera), and I am the son or daughter of her sister. The sister of my maternal aunt is my great maternal aunt (matertera magna), and I am the grandson or granddaughter of her sister. The sister of my grandmother is my abmatertera and I am a great-grandson or great-granddaughter of her sister. The sister of my great-grandmother is my promatertera, and I am the son or daughter of her granddaughter.
28. The family tree that legal advisors draw up con- cerning lineage is called a stemma, where the degrees of relationship are spelled out - as, for example, "this one is the son, this one is the father, this one the grandfather, this one the relative on the father's side," and all the rest. Here are the figures for these relationships. 29. While this consanguinity diminishes towards the last degree, as it subdivides through the levels of descent, and kinship (propinquitas) ceases to exist, the law recovers it again through the bond of matrimony, and in a certain way calls it back as it slips away. Thus, consanguinity is estab- lished up to the sixth degree of kinship, so that just as the generation of the world and the status of humankind comes to an end through six ages, so kinship in a family is terminated by the same number of degrees. 
vii. Marriages (De coniugiis) 1. 'Man' (vir) signifies gender, not marital status, unless you say in addition, 'her man.' 2. But 'husband' (maritus) without an addi- tional term means a man who is married. 'Husband' comes from 'masculine' (mas, adjective) as if the word were mas (i.e. "male," noun), for the noun is the pri- mary form, and it has masculus as a diminutive form; maritus is derived from this. 3.A 'betrothed man' (spon- sus) is so called from pledging (spondere, ppl. sponsus), for before the use of matrimonial registers the betrothed sent each other written warranties in which they would pledge to each other that they consented to the laws of marriage, and they would provide guarantors. 4. From this, it was accepted that we call a betrothed man spon- sus, from 'pledging,' and a betrothed woman sponsa in
similar fashion. Again, properly speaking, 'to pledge' means "to intend." Therefore, he is a sponsus not just because he promises, but because he pledges and gives sponsors (sponsor).
5. 'Earnest-money' (arrabo) is so called as though the word were arra bona ("good pledge"), for what is given for the purposes of matrimony is well given, since mar- riage is good. But that which is given for the sake of forni- cation and adultery is bad, and therefore not an arrabo.
6. A pledge (arra) is so called 'from the thing' (a re) for which it is given. Moreover, an arra is not only a pledge of marriage, but also a pledge for anything that has been promised - that something will be given back, or that a promise will be fulfilled. 7. Suitors (procus) are peti- tioners of marriage, so called from 'pressing one's suit' (procare) or 'petitioning' (petere). 8. A bride's-woman (pronuba) is so called because she presides over a bride
(praeesse + nubens) and she is the one who joins the bride to her husband. She is also called a paranympha,
for the nympha is the bride in the wedding ceremony, and nympha (also meaning "water") refers to the duty of washing (i.e. bathing the bride), since the word also alludes to the word for 'marrying' (nubere).
9. 'Conjugal partners' (coniunx) are so called on account of the yoke (iugum) that is placed on those yoked together (coniungere) in matrimony. Customarily, those who are married are placed under a yoke, indicative of future harmony, lest they be separated. However, con- jugal partners are more truly so called from the initial pledge of their betrothal, even though conjugal relations are still unknown to them, as Mary is called the 'conjugal partner' of Joseph, but between them there neither was nor would be any commingling of the flesh. 10. Brides (nupta) are so called because they veil their faces, for the word for brides is taken from 'clouds' (nubes), which
cover the heavens. Whence the wedding festivities are called 'nuptials' (nuptiae), because there the heads of the newlyweds are covered for the first time. The word obnu- bere means "cover." 11. The opposite of this is 'unmar- ried' (innuba), that is, innupta, a woman who has not yet veiled her own face.
12. Wives (uxor) are so called as though the word were unxior, for there was an ancient custom that, as soon as newlyweds would come to their husbands' threshold, before they entered they would decorate the door posts with woolen fillets and anoint (unguere, perfect unxi) them with oil. Hence the newlyweds were called 'wives' as if the word were unxior. And they would avoid stepping on the thresholds, because at that place the doors both come together and separate. 13. A matron (matrona) is a woman who has already married, and she is called a matrona as though she were the 'mother of a born child' (mater nati), or because now she can become a mother (mater) - whence also matrimonium ("matrimony") is so called. There is a difference between a matron and a mother, and between a mother and a materfamilias; for a woman is called a 'matron' because she has entered in matrimony; a 'mother' because she has borne children; and 'materfamilias' because through certain procedures of law she has passed over into the household (familia) of her husband.
14. A man is called 'monogamous' (monogamus) because he has been married to only one woman, for µóvoç is the Greek word for 'one,' and y?µoç is trans- lated as "marriage." 15. A man is called digamus and trigamus for the numbers of wives he has had, as though he were a husband to two or three women. 16. A widow (vidua) is so called because she has not been part of a
pair along with a man (vir, "man" + duo, "two"), and after the death of her first husband she has not attached
herself in a union with another man. Women who marry other men after the death of their first husbands are not called 'widows.' Again, she is called 'deprived' (viduus, adj.) because she is alone, because she has lost the rights of marriage related to sharing her life with a husband.
17. The wife of a brother is called fratrissa. The brother of a husband is called levir. The wives of two brothers
call each other ianetrix (cf. ?"v?t?p?ç, "wives of broth- ers") as if the term were 'frequenting the doors' (ianua
+ terere), or through the same 'door' having 'entry' (ianua + iter). The sister of a husband is called galos (cf. y?2Yç, "sister-in-law"). 18. The husband of a sister
does not have a special name, nor does the brother of a wife.
19. Matrimony (matrimonium) is the lawful 'passing into a husband's control' and marriage contract of mar- riageable women. 20.A 'conjugal union' (coniugium) is a marital relationship of persons who have met the legal requirements, marked by joining together and sexual intercourse with one another. This coniugium is so called because the two people are conjoined (coniungere), or from the yoke (iugum) by which they are coupled in marriage, so that they cannot be unbound or separated.
21. The word conubium ("marriage"), however, is formed not from nupta ("married woman"), but from the word nubo ("veil, wed"). And it is called conubium when equals enter into a married state, as for example Roman citizens, clearly equal in status. But it is not conubium when a Roman citizen is joined with a woman of Latium. Whenever a marriage is not defined as conubium, the children do not become members of the father's line.
22. The 'wedding' (hymenaeus, also meaning "wed- ding song") is so called from a certain Hymenaeus, who was the first to enjoy a fortunate wedding, or it is from the term úµ?v, the membrane that is the closed gateway of virginity. 23. 'Living together' (contubernium) is an agreement to sleep together for a time; whence the term 'tent' (tabernaculum), which is pitched now here, now there. 24. A repudiation (repudium) is that which, sub- stantiated by witnesses, is delivered to someone who is either present or absent. 25.A divorce (divortium) occurs whenever a marriage has dissolved, and one of the part- ners pursues a new marriage. Moreover, 'divorce' is so called from a parting of ways, that is, paths stretching in 'different directions' (diversus). 26. Frivolum occurs when two people separate in such a state of mind that they once again return to each other, for 'frivolous' (frivolus) is being marked by a wavering and fickle mind, not a stable one. Appropriately, useless crockery is called frivola.
27. There are three reasons to marry a wife: the first reason is for the sake of offspring, about which we read
in Genesis (1:28): "And he blessed them, saying: Increase and multiply." The second reason is for a help, about which, Genesis says (2:18): "It is not good for the man to be alone: let us make him a help like unto him- self." The third reason is lack of self-restraint, whence the apostle Paul says, for example (I Corinthians 7:9): "Let the man who cannot contain himself marry." 28. In choosing a husband, four things are usually considered: valor, family, good looks, and wisdom. Of these, wis- dom is the more powerful for arousing the feeling of love. Vergil refers to these four qualities with regard to Aeneas, because Dido was driven by them into love for him (Aen. 4.11-14):
By good looks:
What a bearing he has, what looks!
By valor:
And what a brave heart, what feats of arms!
By speech:
Ah, by what fates this man has been tossed about, what drawn-out wars he was singing of!
By family:
Indeed, I believe - and it is no empty trust - that he belongs to the family of the gods.
29. Then, in choosing a wife, four things impel a man to love: beauty, family, wealth, and character. Yet it is bet- ter if character is looked for in her rather than beauty. But nowadays, wivesare sought whom wealth and beauty recommend, not uprightness of character. 30. Women stand under the power of their husbands because they are quite often deceived by the fickleness of their minds. Whence, it was right that they were repressed by the authority of men. Consequently, the ancients wanted their unwed women, even those of mature age, to live in guardianship, on account of their fickle minds.
