i. Human beings and their parts (De homine et part- ibus eius) 1. Nature (natura) is so called because itcauses something to be born (nasci, ppl. natus), for it has the power of engendering and creating. Some people say that this is God, by whom all things have been created and exist. 2. Birth (genus) is named from generating (gignere, ppl. genitus), and the term is derived from 'earth,' from which all things are born, for in Greek 'earth' is called y?.
3. Life (vita) is named on account of its vigor (vigor) or because it holds the power (vis) of being born and grow- ing. Whence even trees are said to possess life, because they are generated and grow. 4. Human beings (homo) are so named because they were made from the soil (humus), just as is [also] said in Genesis (cf. 2:7): "And God created man of the soil of the earth." Incorrectly, the whole human is named from this term, that is, the whole human consisting of both substances, the asso- ciation of soul and body. But strictly speaking, 'human being' is from 'soil.'
5. The Greeks called the human being ?v9pYpoç because he has been raised upright from the soil and looks upward in contemplation of his Creator (per- haps cf. ?y, "eye, face, countenance"). The poet Ovid describes this when he says (Met. 1.84):
While the rest of the stooping animals look at the ground, he gave the human an uplifted countenance, and ordered him to see the sky, and to raise his upturned face to the stars.
And the human stands erect and looks toward heaven so as to seek God, rather than look at the earth, as do the beasts that nature has made bent over and attentive to their bellies. 6. Human beings have two aspects: the interior and the exterior. The interior human is the soul [and] the exterior is the body.
7. Soul (anima) takes its name from the pagans, on the assumption that it is wind - hence wind is called
?v?µoç in Greek, because we seem to stay alive by draw- ing air into the mouth. But this is quite clearly untrue, since the soul is generated much earlier than air can be
taken into the mouth, because it is already alive in the mother's womb. 8. Therefore the soul is not air, as was believed by some people who were unable to grasp its incorporeal nature. 9. The spirit (spiritus) is the same as what the Evangelist calls the 'soul' when he says (John 10:18): "I have the power to lay down my soul (anima), and I have the power to take it up again." With regard to the soul of the Lord at the time of his Passion, the aforementioned Evangelist wrote in these words, say- ing (John 19:30): "And bowing his head, he gave up the spirit (spiritus)." 10. What else can "to give up the spirit" be if it is not to lay down one's soul? - for soul is so called because it is alive: spirit, however, is so called either because of its spiritual (spiritalis) nature, or because it inspires (inspirare) in the body.
11. In like manner some people say that the will (animus) and the soul (anima) are the same, even though soul is characteristic of life, while will is characteristic of intention. Whence the philosophers say that life can con- tinue to exist even without the will, and that the soul can endure without the mind (mens) - which is why we use the term 'the mindless' (amens). The mind is so called in that it knows; the will, in that it desires. 12. The mind (mens) is so called because it is eminent (eminere) in the soul, or because it remembers (meminisse). This is why one calls 'forgetful people' (immemoris) also 'mindless' (amens). Because of this, 'mind' is not the word we use for the soul, but for that which is the superior part in the soul, as if the mind were its head or its eye. It is for this same reason also that the human being, due to his mind, is said to be the image of God. Further, all these things are adjoined to the soul in such a way that it is one entity. Different terms have been allotted to the soul according to the effects of its causes. 13. Indeed, memory is mind, whence forgetful people are called mindless. Therefore it is soul when it enlivens the body, will when it wills, mind when it knows, memory (memoria) when it recollects, reason (ratio) when it judges correctly, spirit when it breathes forth, sense (sensus) when it senses something. Will is said to be sense (sensus) with regard to what it
senses (sentire)- whence also the word 'idea' (sententia) derives its name.
14. The body (corpus) is so called, because it 'perishes when it disintegrates' (corruptum perire). It can be dis- solved and it is mortal, and at some point it has to be dissolved. 15. The flesh (caro), however, derives its name from creating (creare). Themaleseediscalled crementum because the bodies of animals and humans are conceived from it. This is also why parents are called creators (cre- ator). 16. Flesh is a composite of four elements. Earth is in flesh, air in breath, moisture in blood, fire in the vital heat. Each element in us has its own physical part, something of which must be repaid when the composite dissolves. 17. However, what is meant by flesh and what is meant by a body (corpus) are different; in flesh there is always a body, but in a body there is not always flesh, for the flesh is what is alive, and this is a body. A body that is not alive is not flesh. The word 'body' is applied to what is dead after life has departed, or to what has been brought forth without life. Sometimes also there is a body that is alive and yet lacks flesh, like grass or trees.
18. The body has five senses: vision, hearing, smell, taste, and touch. Among these, two become active or inactive, while another two are always receptive. 19. They are called senses (sensus), because with their help the soul activates the entire body in a most subtle way with the power of sensation (sentire). Hence one speaks of things that are present (praesentia), because they are 'before the senses' (prae sensibus), just as we call things that are present to our eyes 'before our eyes' (prae oculis).
20. Vision (visus) is what the philosophers call vitre- ous humor. There are those who maintain that vision is created from external light in the air, or it is from a lumi- nous inner spirit that proceeds from the brain through thin passages and, after it has penetrated the outer mem- branes, goes out into the air, where it produces vision upon mixing with a similar substance. 21. And it is called vision (visus) because it is more vivid (vivacior) than the rest of the senses, and also more important and faster, and endowed with greater liveliness (vigere), like mem- ory among the rest of the faculties of the mind. More- over, it is closer to the brain, from which everything emanates; this makes it so that we say "See!" (vide, i.e. imperative from videre) even for those stimuli that per- tain to other senses, as when for instance we say "See how this sounds," or 'See how this tastes," and so on.
22. 
Hearing (auditus) is so called, because it draws (aurire, i.e. haurire) in voices; that is to say, it catches sounds when the air is reverberating. Smell (odoratus) is so called as if it meant 'touched by the smell' (odoris adtactus) of the air, for it is activated when the air is touched. So one also says 'olfactory sense' (olfactus), because one is 'affected by smells' (odoribus adficere). Taste (gustus) comes from the word for the throat (gut- tur). 23. Touch (tactus) is so called, because it strokes (pertractare) and 'makes contact' (tangere, ppl. tactus), and distributes the power of this sense through all the limbs. Indeed, we examine with the sense of touch what we cannot judge with the rest of the senses. There are two kinds of touch: one that comes from the outside to strike us, and another that originates within, inside the body itself. 24. Each sense has been given its own natural function. Thus, what is to be seen is captured by the eyes, what is to be heard, by the ears; soft and hard things are judged by the sense of touch, flavor by the sense of taste, while smell is drawn in through the nostrils.
25. The primary part of the body is the head (caput), and it was given this name because from there all senses and nerves originate (initium capere), and every source of activity arises from it. In it, all sensations become evident. Whence it plays the role, so to speak, of the soul itself, which watches over the body. 26. The crown (vertex) is the place where the hairs of the head concen- trate, and where the hair growth spirals (vertere, "turn") - whence it is named. 27. The word 'skull' (calvaria) comes from its 'bald bones' (ossa calva) through ellipsis of letters, and it is treated as a neuter noun. The occiput (occipitum) is the back part of the head, so called as if it were against the 'head-covering' (capitium), or because it is the back of the head (caput, gen. capitis).
28. Hair (capilli) is so called as if it came from 'strands belonging to the head' (capitis pilus), made so as both to be an ornament, and to protect the head against the cold and defend it from the sun. 'Strands of hair' (pilus) are so called after the skin (pellis) from which they grow, just as the pestle (pilo, i.e. pilum) is so called froma mor- tar (pila), where pigment is ground. 29. A 'head of hair' (caesaries) is so called from 'needing to be cut' (caedere, ppl. caesus); this term is only applied to men, for it is fitting that men have shorn hair, but not women. 30. 'Long hair' (comae) in the strict sense of the word is hair that has not been cut, and it is a Greek word, for the Greeks call long hair caimos, from being cut, whence
they also say m?(c)p?tv for shearing. From this curls (cirrus) derive their name as well, which the Greeks call µa22óç.
31. Tresses strictly speaking are characteristic of women. They are called tresses (crines) because they are sepa- rated (discernere) by headbands. Hence also headdresses (discriminale) are so called, with which divided tresses are tied up.
32. The temples (tempus) are the parts that lie under the cranium on the left and right sides. They are so called because they move and, just like the seasons (tempus), they change, due to this mobility, at certain intervals. 33. The word for face (facies) comes from 'visible likeness' (effigies), for all of the characteristic form (figura) of a human being and the ability for every person to be recognized resides in the face. 34. But 'facial expression' (vultus) is so called because the inclination (voluntas) of the will is displayed by it. The expression changes in various movements according to the will, whence the two terms for the face differ from each other, for while the face refers simply to someone's natural appearance, facial expression reveals what he has on his mind. 35. The forehead (frons) derives its name from the eye-sockets (foramen oculorum). This, a kind of likeness of the soul, expresses the movement of the mind, whether it is joyful or sad, through its own look.
36. Eyes (oculus) are so called, either because the mem- branes of the eyelids cover (occulere) them so as to pro- tect them from the harm of any chance injury, or because they possess a 'hidden light' (occultum lumen), that is, one that is hidden or situated within. Among all the sen- sory organs, they are closest to the soul. Indeed, every indication of the mental state is in the eyes, whence both distress and happiness show in the eyes. The eyes are also called lights (lumen) because light (lumen) emanates from them, either because they hold a light that has been closed up in them from the beginning, or because they reflect light that has been taken from the outside in order to supply vision. 37. The pupil (pupilla) is the middle point of the eye in which the power of vision resides; because small images appear to us there, they are called pupils, since small children are called pupils (pupillus,a term for a minor under the care of a guardian). There are many who use the form pupula, but it is called pupilla because it is pure (pura) and unpolluted (inpolluta), just like 'young girls' (puella). Physiologists say that those who are going to die within three days no longer have the pupils that we see in the eyes, and when the pupils are
no longer visible they are surely beyond hope. 38. The circle with which the white parts of the eye are separated from the distinct blackness of the pupil is called the iris (corona), because with its roundness it adorns (ornare) the edge of the pupil.
39. The eyelids (palpebrae) are the sheltering folds of the eyes. Their name comes from palpitation (pal- pitatio), because they are forever in motion. They meet together to renew the power of the gaze with their fre- quent motion. They are well protected by a barrier of hairs, so that if something were to fall toward the open eyes it would be repelled, and so that, when they are closed in sleep, they may rest hidden, as though under a cover. 40. At the tips of the eyelids, where they touch each other when closed, the hairs growing in an orderly row stand out and serve to protect the eyes, so that they may not easily sustain injury from objects falling into the eye and be hurt, and so as to prevent contact with dust or with some coarser material; by blinking they also soften the impact of the air itself, and thus they cause vision to be precise and clear. 41. Some believe that the word for tears (lacrima) comes from an injury of the mind (laceratio mentis); others maintain that it is iden- tical with what is called 6?mpUov ("tear") in Greek. 42. The upper eyelids (cilium) are coverings with which the eyes are concealed; they are so called because they hide (celare) the eyes and cover them with a safeguard. The eyebrows (supercilium) are so called, because they are 'placed above' (superponere) the eyelids (cilium); they are furnished with hairs so that they may extend as a pro- tection for the eyes and repel the sweat that flows down from the head. The intercilium is the space between the eyebrows that is without hair.
43. The cheeks (gena) are the parts underneath the eyes where the beard begins to form, for in Greek 'beard' is called ysv?tov. They are so called also for this reason, that from the cheeks the beard begins to grow (gignere, ppl. genitus). 44. The cheekbones are the parts that pro- trude under the eyes, set below them for their protection. They are called cheekbones (mala; cf. malum, "apple") either because they protrude under the eyes in a rounded shape, which the Greeks called µ?2ov ("apple," also "cheek"), or because they are above the jaws (maxilla).
45. The word jaws (maxilla) is a diminutive of cheek- bone (mala), just as peg (paxillus) is derived from stake (palus) and small cube (taxillus) from large die (talus). The mandibles (mandibulae) are parts of the jaws, from
which they also take their name. The ancients named the beard (barba) that which pertains to men (vir) and not to women. 
46. The ear (auris) owes its name to the fact that it draws in (aurire, i.e. haurire, "drink in") sounds, whence Vergil also says (cf. Aen. 4.359):
He drank in with these ears (auribus ausit) his words.
Or it is because the Greeks called the voice itself aù6?, from 'hearing' (auditus); through the change of a let- ter ears (auris, pl. aures) are named as if the term were audes. Indeed, the voice makes a sound when it rebounds through the curvature of the ears, whereby the ears receive the sense of hearing. The highest part of the ear is called pinnula from its pointedness, for the ancients used to call a point pinnus, whence also we get the words for 'two-headed axe' (bipinnis) and feather (pinna).
47. Nostrils (naris, ablative nare) are so called, because through them odor and breath ceaselessly 'swim' (nare), or because they warn us with odor, so that we 'know' (noscere, with forms in nor-) and understand something. Hence the opposite: those who do not know anything and who are unrefined are called ignorant (ignarus). Our forefathers used the word for 'smelling something' (olfacere) to mean knowing (scire), as in Terence (cf. The Brothers 397):
And would they not have 'sniffed it out' (olfacere) six whole months before he started anything?
48. Because it is equal in its length and its curvature, the straight part of the nose is called the column (columna); its tip is pirula, from the shape of the fruit of a pear-tree (pirus); the parts to the left and right are called 'little wings' (pinnula), from similarity to wings (ala; cf. pinna, "feather"), and the middle part is called interfinium.
49. The mouth (os) is so called, because through the mouth as if through a door (ostium) we bring food in and throw spit out; or else because from that place food goes in and words come out. 50. The lips (labia) are so called from licking (lambere). The upper lip we call labium, the lower - because it is thicker - labrum. Others call the lips of men labra, the lips of women labia. 51. Varro is of the opinion that the tongue (lingua) was given this name because it binds (ligare) food together. Others think that this is because it binds together words from articulated sounds, for, just as the plectrum strikes upon strings,
so also the tongue strikes against the teeth and makes a vocal sound.
52. Teeth (dens, plural dentes) the Greeks call ò6óv- t?ç, and from there the word seems to have been intro- duced into Latin. The first of these are called incisors (praecisor) because they bite beforehand (i.e. as if 'pre- incise') into everything ingested. The next in line are called canines (caninus), two of which are in the right jaw and two in the left. And they are called canines because they resemble dogs' teeth, and dogs crush bones with them, as does a human being; so that what the teeth in front cannot cut they pass on to these, so that they may break it apart. The common people call these colomelli (cf. columella, "column") due to their length and roundness. The last ones are the molars (molaris), which break up what has been bitten off and crushed by the teeth in front and grind (molere) it and mush it; whence they are called molars. 53. From the teeth one can tell apart the sexes, for in men there are more, in women fewer.
54. The gums (gingiva) derive their name from pro- ducing (gignere) teeth. However, they were also created as decoration for the teeth, for if the teeth existed without cover, they would cause horror rather than being con- sidered an ornament. 55. Our palate is placed, like the heavens, above, and thence palate (palatum) is derived from sky (polus). In the same vein the Greeks call the palate oùpavóç ("palate, vault of the sky"), because, due to its concave shape, it bears a resemblance to the sky.
56. The throat (fauces) gets its name from pouring forth (fundere) voices, or else because with its help we 'speak voices' (fari voces). The windpipe (arteria) is so called either because by its means air (aer), that is, breath, is conducted from the lungs, or else because it retains the vital breath in tight (artus) and narrow passageways, whence it emits the sounds of the voice. These sounds would all sound alike if the movement of the tongue did not cause a modulation of the voice. 57. In the Gallic language toles (cf. classical Latin toles, "goiter") - what in the diminutive are commonly called tonsils (tusilla, i.e. tonsilla) - is the name for the part in the throat that often swells up (turgescere). The chin (mentum) is so called, because from there the jaws (mandibula) begin - that is, because there they are joined together.
58. The gullet (gurgulio) derives its name from the throat (guttur), whose passageway extends to the mouth and nose. It has a path along which the voice is sent to the tongue, so that it can articulate the sounds of words. Whence we also say 'chatter' (garrio). 59. The esopha- gus (rumen) is very close to the gullet; through it food and drink are swallowed. Because of this, animals that bring food back to the mouth and chew it again are said to ruminate (ruminare). The epiglottis (sublinguium) is a covering of the gullet, a kind of small 'tongue' (lingua), which opens or closes the aperture of the tongue.
60. The neck (collum) is so called, because it is rigid and rounded like a column (columna), carrying the head and sustaining it as if it were a citadel. Its front is called the throat (gula), its back, the nape (cervix). 61. The nape (cervix), however, is so called, because through this part the brain extends to the marrow of the spinal cord, as if it were the 'path of the brain' (cerebri via). In former times only the plural, cervices, was used; Hortensius was the first who used the singular word cervix. Neverthe- less, cervix in the singular refers to the part of the body, while in the plural it often means 'obstinacy' (contu- macia). Thus Cicero says in the Second Action Against Verres (5.110): "Would you accuse a praetor? Break his cervix!"
62. We say shoulder (humerus, i.e. umerus), as if the word were the 'forequarter of an animal' (armus), to distinguish humans from mute animals, so that we say human beings have shoulders, whereas animals have forequarters, for forequarters in the proper sense belong to quadrupeds. The highest part in the back of the human shoulder is called ola. 63. The arms (bracchium) derive their name from strength: for ßapáç in Greek means "heavy and strong." In the arms is the brawn of the upper arms (lacertus), and there the marked strength of the muscles is located. This is called the brawn, that is, the muscles (musculus): and they are called the brawn (torus) because at that place the sinews seem to be twisted (tortus). 64. The elbow (cubitum) is so called, because we recline on it (cubare) in order to eat. According to some, the ulna is an extension of either hand (i.e. the forearm), according to others, it is the elbow - and this is more accurate, because in Greek ?2?voç (i.e. ?2sv?) means "elbow."
65. 
The underarms (subbracchium) are called 'armpits' (ala, lit. "wing"), because from them the move- ment of the arms originates in the manner of wings. Some call the armpit ascilla (i.e. axilla), because from there the arm is raised (cellere), that is, moved; similarly also a 'small mask' (oscillum) is so called, because 'a face swings' (os ... cillatur), that is, is moved, for cillere means "move." There are those who call the armpit subhircus, because in many humans they give off the foul odor of goats (hircus).
66. The hand (manus) is so called because it is in the service (munus) of the whole body, for it serves food to the mouth and it operates everything and manages it; with its help we receive and we give. With strained usage, manus also means either a craft or a craftsman - whence we also derive the word for wages (manupretium, lit. "hand-price"). 67. The 'right hand' (dextra) is so called from 'giving' (dare), for it is given as a pledge ofpeace. It is clasped as a sign of good faith and of greeting; and this is the sense in Cicero Against Catiline 3.8: "At the command of the Senate I gave a pledge of protection," that is, his right hand. Whence also the Apostle [says (Galatians 2:9): "They gave their right hands to me"]. 68. The 'left hand' (sinixtra, i.e. sinistra) is so called as if the word were derived from 'without the right hand' (sine dextra), or as if it 'permitted' something to happen, because sinixtra is derived from 'permitting' (sinere). 69. The hand with outstretched fingers is called palm (palma); when they are clenched, it is called fist (pugnus). 'Fist' is derived from 'handful' (pugillus), just as 'palm' is derived from the extended branches of the palm tree (palma).
70. The fingers (digitus) are so called, either because there are ten (decem) of them, or because they are connected handsomely (decenter), for they combine in themselves both the perfect number and the most appro- priate order. The first finger is called thumb (pollex), because among the rest it prevails (pollere) in strength and power. The second is the index finger (index), which is also called the 'greeter' (salutaris) or 'pointer' (demon- stratorius), because we greet someone (salutare) or point something out (ostendere) usually with it. 71. The third finger is called 'immodest' (impudicus), because often an accusation of a shameful action is expressed by it. The fourth is the ring (anularis) finger, because it is the one on which the ring (anulus) is worn. It is also called med- ical (medicinalis), because physicians (medicus) use it to scoop up ground eye-salves. The fifth is called auric- ularis, because we use it to scrape out the ear (auris).
72. The nails (ungula) we call by this name from the Greek, for they call a fingernail ovU(.
The torso (truncus) is the middle part of the body from the neck to the groin. Nigidius says of it (fr. 108): "The head is held up by the neck, the torso is sustained by the hipbones, the knees, and the legs." 73. The Greeks called the front of the torso from the neck to the stomach the thorax; this iswhatwecallthechest(arca), becauseinthat place is a hidden (arcanus), that is, a secret thing, from which other people are shut out (arcere). From this also a strong box (arca) and an altar (ara) derive their names, as if the words meant 'secret things.' The protruding, fleshy parts of the chest are called the breasts (mamilla), and between them the bony part is the pectus, and what is to its right and left are the ribs (costa). 74. It is called pectus, because it is 'flattened down' (pexus) between the protruding parts, the breasts. The word comb (pecten) is also derived from this, because it makes the hair flattened down. The breasts (mamilla) are so called, because they are as round as apples (malum); it is a diminutive term.
75. The nipples are the tips of the breasts, which nurs- ing infants grasp. And they are called nipples (papilla) because it appears as if infants were eating (pappare) them while they suck milk. The breast (mamilla) is accordingly the whole protrusion of the female breast, the nipple only the small part from which milk is drawn.
76. The female breasts (uber) are so called, either because they are abundant (ubertus) with milk, or because they are moist (uvida), that is to say, filled with the liquid of the milk as if they were grapes (uva). 77. Milk (lac) derives the meaning of its name from its color, because it is a white liquid: for in Greek 2?Umóç means "white." It becomes what it is through a transformation of blood, for after birth, if any blood is not consumed as nourish- ment in the womb, it flows along a natural passageway to the breasts and, whitened due to their special property, it takes on the quality of milk.
78. The skin (cutis) is that which is uppermost in the body, so called, because in covering the body it is the first to suffer from an incision, for in Greek, mUttç means "incision." It is also called pellis (i.e. another word for "skin"), because it repels (pellere) external injuries from the body by covering it, and it endures rain, wind, and the fierce heat of the sun. 79. Pellis, however, is the word used for skin soon after stripping, while skin that has been treated is called 'hide.' It is called hide (corium) by derivation from flesh (caro), because flesh is covered by
it, but properly speaking the word is used in reference to brute beasts. 80. The word for the pores (porus) of the body is Greek - these in Latin properly are called air-passages (spiramentum), because through them the enlivening breath (spiritus) is supplied from the outside.
81. Arvina is the fat that adheres to the skin. A 'fleshy part' (pulpa) is flesh without fat, so called because it pulsates (palpitare): for it often quivers. Many also call it viscus ("flesh"; cf. the homophone viscus, "birdlime") because it is sticky.
82. The limbs (membrum) are the parts of the body. The joints (artus), with which the limbs are connected, are so called from 'drawing together' (artare). 83. The sinews (nervus) are so called through a derivation from the Greek, as they call a sinew v?upov. Others believe that 'sinews' comes from Latin, because the connections of the joints attach (inhaerere) to them each in turn. But this much is certain: the sinews constitute the greatest part of the substance of strength, for the thicker they are, the more they are disposed to augment strength. 84. The joints (artus) are so called because, being bound to each other by the tendons, they are 'drawn together' (artare), that is, they are bound tight. The diminutive form of artus is articulus; we use the word artus in reference to main limbs, like the arms, but the word articulus in ref- erence to minor limbs like the fingers. 85. The heads of the bones are called compago, because they hold together through being connected (compingere, ppl. compactus) with sinews as if with a kind of glue.
86. The bones (os, gen. ossis) are the firm parts of the body. They support all postures of the body and give it strength. The bones are so called from burning (urere, ppl. ustus), becausetheywouldbecrematedbythe ancients; or, as others believe, from mouth (os), because there they are visible, while in the rest of the body they are hidden, covered by skin and flesh. 87. 'Bone marrow' (medulla) is so called, because it moistens (madefacere) the bones, for it supplies fluid and strengthens them. The vertibulum is the end point of a bone, rounded in a thicker knot; it is so called because it is turned (vert- ere) when the limb is bent. 88. Cartilage consists of soft bones without bone marrow, the kind that the ear, the septum, and the ends of the ribs have, or also the cov- ering of bones, which moves. And it is called cartilage
(cartilago) because it 'lacks pain' (carere dolorem) when flexed, because of reduced friction.
89. Some believe that the ribs (costa) are so called because the interior parts are guarded (custodire) by them and the whole soft region of the belly, encased by them, is protected. 90. The side (latus) is so called, because it is hidden (latere) when we are lying down; it is also the left (laeva) part of the body. The movement of the right side is more readily controlled, while the left is stronger and better suited to carrying heavy loads. Whence the left side is also so called because it is more apt at lifting (levare) something and at carrying it. This same left side carries the shield, the sword, the quiver, and the remaining load, so that the right side may be unhampered for action. 91. The back (dorsum) extends from the neck down to the loins. It is so called because it is a rather hard (durior) surface of the body, like a stone, strong both for carrying and for enduring things. 92. The back (tergum) is so called because when we lie on the ground (terra) we are stretched out on our backs - something that only a human being can do, for dumb animals all lie down either on their bellies or on their sides. This is also why we speak incorrectly of the tergum in animals.
93. The shoulder-blades (scapula) . . . The inter- scapilium is so called because it is situated between the shoulder-blades, whence its name. 94. The palae (lit. "spades," hence another word for 'shoulder-blades') are the prominent parts on the left and on the right side of the back, so called, because we pin them down in wrestling; the Greeks call wrestling p?2?. 95. The spine (spina, also meaning "thorn") is the backbone (iunctura dorsi, "linkage of the back"), so called because it has sharp spurs; its joints are called vertebrae (spondilium) on account of the part of the brain (i.e. the spinal cord) that is carried through them via a long duct to the other parts of the body. 96. The 'sacred spine' (spina sacra) is the lowest part of the spinal column; the Greeks call it
¬?pòv òotouv, because it is the first bone which is formed when a child is conceived, and for this reason it was the first part of a sacrificial animal that would be offered by the pagans to their gods - whence it is called 'sacred spine.'
97. Varro says that the kidneys (renes) are so called because they produce a stream (rivus) of filthy liquid. Now blood vessels and marrow exude a fine liquid into the kidneys; this liquid in turn flows down from the
kidneys, released by the heat of sexual intercourse. 98. The loins (lumbus) derive their name from wanton- ness of desire (libido), because in males the cause of bodily pleasure is located there, just as in women it is in the navel. Whence it is also said in the begin- ning of the speech addressed to Job (38:3): "Gird up thy loins (lumbus) like a man," so that there would be a preparation for resistance in the very loins in which the occasion for overpowering lust customarily arises.
99. The navel (umbilicus) is the center of the body, so called, because it is a protuberance (umbus) of the belly. Whence also the place in the middle of a shield is called a 'boss' (umbo), from which it hangs, for the infant hangs from it in the uterus and it is also nourished from it.
100. The private parts (ilium, i.e. ilia) are referred to with a Greek word, because there we cover ourselves up, for in Greek ilios (i.e. ?"2á?tv) means "cover up."
101. The buttocks (clunis) are so called, because they are situated next to the colon (colum), that is, to the large intestine (longao). The nates (natis) are so called because we support ourselves (inniti) with them when we are seated. Hence also the flesh is bunched up in them, so that the bones may not hurt from the heavy weight of the body when it presses down. 102. The parts of the body called genitals (genitalia) receive their name, as the word itself shows, from the begetting (gignere, ppl. genitus) of offspring, because with them one procreates and begets. They are also known as 'organs of modesty' (pudenda) on account of a feeling of shame (cf. pudor, "shame"), or else from 'pubic hair' (pubis), by which they are also hidden with a covering. However, they are also called the 'indecent parts' (inhonestus), because they do not have the same kind of comeliness as limbs that are placed in open view.
103. For the genitals the word veretrum is also used, either because it is applied to 'males only' (vir tantum), or because from them sperm (virus) is secreted. Properly speaking, virus is used to refer to the liquid that flows from the male organs of generation. 104. The word for 'testicles' (testiculus) is a diminutive form of testis ("testi- cle"), of which there are always at least two. They supply sperm via a reed-shaped conduit, and both the kidneys and loins receive sperm from the spinal cord for the sake of procreation. The scrotum (fiscus, lit. "purse") is the skin that contains the testicles. 105. The hind-parts (pos- teriora) are certainly so called because they are on the
backside and on the opposite side from the face, so that while we purge the bowels we may not defile the sense of sight. The anus (meatus) is so called because excrement passes (meare) through it, that is, it is discharged.
106. The thighs (femur) are so called, because the male sex differs from the female (femina) with respect to this part. They extend from the groin to the knees. By deriva- tion, the femina (i.e. a plural form of femur) are the parts of the thighs with which we cling to the backs of horses when riding. Hence formerly a warrior was said to lose his horse from underneath his femina (i.e. when his horse was slain). 107. The hips (coxa) are so called, as if the word were 'conjunction of axes' (coniuncta axis); the thighs are moved by them. Their concave parts are called vertebra, because in them the heads of the thighs are turned (vertere). They are also called hocks (suffrago), because they are 'broken off underneath' (subtus fran- gere), that is, jointed underneath, not on the upper side, as in the arms.
108. The knees (genu) are points where thighs and shins meet; and they are called genua because in utero they are situated opposite the eye-sockets (gena). There they cling to each other, and they are co-engendered with the eyes as signs of tearfulness and an appeal for pity. In this way genu is named after gena. 109. Thus, when a human being is folded together in the process of gesta- tion and taking shape, the knees are raised up, and with their help the eye-sockets are formed, so that they may become hollow and recessed. Ennius (Courtney fr. 41) writes:
And the eye-socket (gena) presses close to the knees (genua).
This is the reason why people are immediately moved to tears when they fall on their knees, for nature wanted them to remember the womb of the mother, where they sat in darkness, so to speak, before they came to the light (cf. Matthew 4:16).
110. The shins (crus, gen. crura) are so called, because with their help we run (currere) and take steps (gressus). They extend from below the knees to the calves (sura). The tibias (tibia) are so called as if the word were 'trum- pets' (tuba), for they are similar in length and shape. 111. The ankle (talus) is so called from tolus, for a tolus is a protruding roundness; whence also the dome of a round temple is called a tolus. The ankle is situated beneath the shins and above the heel. 112. The feet (pes, gen. pedis) are
assigned a name from Greek etymology, for the Greeks call those parts pó6?ç, and they move forward set on the earth in alternating motion.
113. The soles (planta) have their name from flatness (planities), because they are not of a round shape, as in quadrupeds - otherwise the two-legged human being could not stand upright - but instead are of a flat (planus) and elongated shape, so that they may stabilize the body. The frontal parts of the soles consist of many bones. 114. The back part of the soles is called the heel (calcis, i.e. calx); the name was imposed on it by derivation from 'hardened skin' (callum), with which we tread (calcare) on the earth (cf. solum, "soil"); hence also calcaneus (i.e. another word for 'heel'). 115. The sole (solum) is the lower part of the foot, so called because with it we impress foot- prints in the earth. But anything that sustains something is called a solum, as if it were derived from 'solid ground' (solidum); whence the ground is also called 'soil' (solum), because it sustains everything; and the sole of the foot is so called, because it carries the entire weight of the body.
116. We say viscera not only for the 'intestines,' but also for whatever is under the skin, from the word viscus (i.e. the tissue under the skin), which is located inbetween the skin and the flesh. The viscera are also called 'vital organs' (vitalia), namely the places surrounding the heart (cor), as if the word were viscora, because in that place life (vita), that is, the soul, is contained. 117. Likewise the endings of the sinews, made of sinews and blood joined together, are called viscera. Muscles (lacertus), otherwise known as 'mice' (mus), because in the individual limbs they take the 'place of the heart' (locus cordis), just as the heart itself is in the center of the whole body, and they are called by the name of the animals they resemble, that lurk under the earth, for muscles (musculus) are so called from their similarity to mice. Muscles are also called brawn (torus), because there the innards appear to be twisted (tortus).
118. The word 'heart' (cor) is either derived from a Greek term, because they call it map6(c)a, or from care (cura), for in it resides all solicitude and the origin of knowledge. It is next to the lungs, so that, when anger is
kindled, it may be moderated by the fluid of the lungs. It has two arteries (arteria), of which the left one has more blood, the right one more air - for this reason we examine the pulse in the right arm. 119. The praecor- dia are places close to the heart in which sensation is perceived; and they are called praecordia because the origins (principium) of the heart (cor, also meaning "the seat of understanding" - see 127 below) and of deliber- ating thought (cogitatio) are to be found there. 120. The pulse (pulsus) is so called because it throbs (palpitare); from what it indicates we understand whether someone is ill or in good health. Its motion is two-fold: either simple or composite. It is simple when it consists of one beat, composite when it consists of several irregular and unequal motions. These motions have fixed intervals: a dactylic rhythm, as long as they are healthy, but they are a sign of death when they are quite fast - as in 6opma6?- Sovt?ç (lit., "swift as a gazelle") - or quite slow - as in µUpµ(c)Sovt?ç (lit., "weak as ants").
121. The 'blood vessels' (vena) are so called because they are passageways (via) for the flowing blood and conduits (rivus) spreading throughout the body, with which all limbs are supplied with fluid. 122. Blood took its name from a Greek etymology, because it is animated, strengthened, and alive (perhaps cf. S??tv, "live"). It is called 'blood' as long as it is in the body, 'gore' when it is shed. Gore (cruor) is so called because once it has been shed it 'runs away' (decurrere), or because in run- ning (currere) it falls (corruere). Others interpret 'gore' as corrupted (corrumpere) blood, which is secreted. Still others say that blood (sanguis) is so called, because it is sweet (suavis). 123. Blood, however, is untainted only in young people, for physiologists say that blood dimin- ishes with age - hence also old people have a tremor. Properly speaking, however, blood is possession of a soul. Hence women will lacerate their cheeks in grief, and crimson robes and crimson flowers are offered to the dead.
124. 'Lung' (pulmo) is a word derived from Greek, for the Greeks call the lung p2?áµYv, because it is a fan (flabellum) for the heart, in which the pv?uµa, that is, the breath, resides, through which the lungs are both put in motion and kept in motion - from this also the lungs are so named. Now, in Greek pv?uµa means "breathing,"
which, by blowing and exhaling, sends the air out and draws it back. The lungs are moved through this, and they pump, both in opening themselves, so that they may catch a breath, and in constricting, so that they may expel it. The lungs are the engine of the body.
125. The liver (iecur) has this name because there the fire (ignis) that flies up into the brain (cerebrum) has its seat. From there this fire is spread to the eyes and to the other sense organs and limbs, and through its heat the liver converts the liquid that it has drawn to itself from food into blood, which it furnishes to individual limbs for sustenance and growth. Those who debate medical questions also maintain that the liver is the seat of plea- sure and desire. 126. The lobes of the liver are its edges, resembling the edges of chicory leaves, or tongues that stick out. They are called 'lobes' (fibra) because among the pagans they were carried by the soothsayers in their sacred rites to the 'altars of Phoebus' (Phoebi ara), so that after the lobes were offered and set on fire the soothsayers might receive the god's responses.
127. The spleen (splen) is so called from filling in (sup- plementum) a place opposite to the liver, so that there may not exist an empty space. Some are also of the opin- ion that it was made for the sake of laughter, for we laugh thanks to the spleen, are angry thanks to the gall-bladder, have knowledge thanks to the heart, and love thanks to the liver. When these four elements come together, the living creature is complete. 128. The 'gall bladder' (fel) is so called because it is a small sack (folliculus) producing a liquid that is called bile (bilis). In Greek, the stomach (stomachus) is called 'mouth,' because it is the gateway of the belly, and it receives food and passes it on to the intestines. 
129. The intestines (intestina; cf. intestinus, "inward") are so called because they are confined in the interior (interior) part of the body; they are arranged in long coils like circles, so that they may digest the food they take in little by little, and not be obstructed by added food. 130. The caul (omentum) is a membrane that con- tains the greater part of the intestines; the Greeks call it sp(c)p2oov. The diaphragm (disseptum, i.e. dissaeptum) is an inner organ that separates the belly and the other intestines from the lungs and the heart. 131. The cecum (caecum, "blind gut") is an intestine without opening or outlet; the Greeks call it tU??2òv svt?pov ("blind gut"). The jejunum (ieiunum) is a thin intestine, whence also the word 'fasting' (ieiunium). 132. The belly, the bowels,
and the womb are distinct from each other. The belly is what digests food that has been taken in, is visible from the outside, extends from the chest to the groin and is called belly (venter) because it causes life's nutriments to pass through the whole body. 133. The bowels consti- tute the part that receives the food and is purged. Sallust writes (Histories 1.52): "Pretending to purge his bowels (alvus)." And they are called 'bowels' (alvus) because they are cleansed (abluere), that is, purged, because fecal filth flows out from them.
134. The womb (uterus) is something only women have and in which they conceive; in shape it is similar to a small stalk. Nevertheless there are many authors who like to use uterus for the belly of either sex - not only poets, but also other writers. 135. However, it is called uterus because it is two-fold and divides on both (uterque) sides, into two parts that extend apart and bend back in the shape of a ram's horn; or because it is filled with the fetus within (interius). Hence also 'leather bag' (uter), because it contains something inwardly (intrin- secus), namely the limbs and the viscera. 136. The word 'paunch' (aqualiculus), however, is properly used only in reference to a pig, and was transferred metaphor- ically to the belly (venter). The matrix (matrix) is so called, because the fetus is engendered in it, for it fos- ters the received semen, gives a body to what is fos- tered and differentiates the limbs of that which has been given a body. 137. The vulva (vulva) is so called as if the word were 'folding-door' (valva), that is, the door of the belly, either because it takes up semen or because the fetus emerges from it. The bladder (vesica) is so called, because it is filled with urine collected from the kid- neys as a 'vessel' is filled up with 'water' (vas . . . aqua), and it is swollen by the liquid. Birds do not have this function.
138. Urine (urina) is so called, either because it burns (urere), or because it comes out of the kidneys (renes). By its indications are shown future health and sickness. This liquid is called 'piss' (lotium) by the common people, because with its help clothes are washed (lavere, ppl. lotus), that is, cleaned. 139. Seed (semen) is what is 'taken up' (sumere) by either the earth or the uterus after it is cast, so that either a plant or a fetus may grow from it. It is a fluid, made from a decoction of food and the body, and diffused by the blood vessels and the bone marrow. From there it is sweated out like bilge water and condenses in the kidneys. Ejaculated in sexual intercourse and taken
into the uterus of a woman, it somehow takes shape in the body under the influence of the heat of the viscera and the irrigation of menstrual blood.
140. The menses consist of an overflow of women's blood. They are called 'menses' (menstrua) after the cycle of moonlight in which this flux regularly comes to pass - forin Greek the mooniscalled µ?v?. These are also called 'womanish things' (muliebria), for the woman is the only menstruating animal. 141. If they are touched by the blood of the menses, crops cease to sprout, unfer- mented wine turns sour, plants wither, trees lose their fruit, iron is corrupted byrust, bronze turns black. If dogs eat any of it, they are made wild with rabies. The glue of pitch, which is dissolved neither by iron nor water, when polluted with this blood spontaneously disperses. 142. Moreover, semen cannot germinate after several days of menstruation, because there is not then enough men- strual blood by which it could be moistened to the point of being thoroughly wet. Thin semen doesn't adhere to the female organs; it slides down and doesn't have the power to cling to them. Similarly, thick semen also lacks the power to beget anything, because, due to its excessive thickness, it cannot mix with the menstrual blood. This causes sterility in both men and women; it is either due to the excessive thickness of the semen or blood, or to their excessive thinness.
143. It is said that the heart of a human being is made first, because it is the seat of all life and wisdom. There- after it takes forty days for the whole work to be com- pleted - they say that these facts are adduced from mis- carriages. Others are of the opinion that the fetus begins to grow with the head, whence we also see the eyes made first in birds' fetuses in eggs. 144. The fetus (foetus) is so called because it is still 'being kept warm' (fovere, ppl. fotus) in the uterus. The small sac that contains the fetus and is born with the infant is called the afterbirth (secun- dae), because at birth it follows (sequi, gerundive sequen- dus). 145. They say that newborn children resemble their fathers if the paternal seed is stronger, and their mothers if the maternal is stronger. Looks that are similar (i.e. to both parents) are explained by this reason: those who resemble the features of both parents were conceived from equally mixed paternal and maternal seed. Simi- larity to grandparents and great-grandparents comes to
pass because, just as a great deal of seed is hidden in the earth, so also seed that can assume the shape of our parents is hidden in us. However, from the paternal seed girls may be born, and from the maternal seed boys, because all offspring is made of two kinds of seed, and the greater portion, because it predominates, determines the similarity of the sex.
146. Some parts in our body were created solely for reasons of usefulness, as for instance the viscera; some for usefulness and ornament, like the sense organs in the face, and the hands and feet in the body, limbs that are both of great usefulness and most pleasing form. 147. Some are purely for ornament, as for instance breasts in men, and the navel in both sexes. Some are there to allow us to tell the difference between the sexes, as for instance the genitals, the grownbeard, and the wide chest in men; in women the smooth cheeks and the narrow chest; although, in order to conceive and carry a fetus, they have wide loins and sides. That which pertains to human beings and the parts of the body has been partly treated; now I will add something on the ages of a human being.
ii. On the ages of human beings (De aetatibus hominum) 1. There are six stages in a lifetime: infancy, childhood, adolescence, youth, maturity, and old age. 2. The first age, the infancy (infantia) of a newborn child, lasts seven years. 3. The second age is childhood (pueri- tia), that is, a pure (purus) age, during which a child is not yet suited for procreating; it lasts until the four- teenth year. 4. The third age, adolescence (adolescentia), is mature (adultus, ppl. of adolescere) enough for pro- creating and lasts until the twenty-eighth year. 5. The fourth age, youth (iuventus), is the strongest of all ages, ending in the fiftieth year. 6. The fifth is the age of an elder person (senior), that is, maturity (gravitas), which is the decline from youth into old age; it is not yet old age, but no longer youth, because it is the age of an older person, which the Greeks call pp?oßát?ç - for with the Greeks an old person is not called presbyter, but yspYv. This age begins in the fiftieth and ends in the seventieth year. 7. The sixth age is old age (senectus), which has no time limit in years; rather, however much life is left after the previous five ages is allotted to old age. 8. Senium,
however, is the last part of old age, so called because it is the end of the sixth (cf. seni, "six") age.
Into these six intervals, therefore, the philosophers have divided human life - ages in which life is changed, runs its course, and reaches the final point of death. Let us therefore proceed briefly through the aforemen- tioned stages in a lifetime, demonstrating their etymolo- gies with regard to the terms used for a human being.
9. A human being of the first age is called an infant (infans); it is called an infant, because it does not yet know how to speak (in-, "not"; fari, present participle fans, "speaking"), that is, it cannot talk. Not yet having its full complement of teeth, it has less ability to articulate words. 10.A boy (puer) is so called from purity (puritas), because he is pure and still retains, without the hint of a beard, the bloom of the cheeks. They are ephebes (ephebus), so called after Phoebus, gentle youths, not yet [grown] men. 11. The word child (puer), however, is used in three ways: in reference to birth, as in Isaiah (cf. 9:6): "A child (puer) is born to us." To indicate age, as in "an eight-year-old," "a ten-year-old"- whence the following expression (Courtney fr. 3):
Now he took a child's (puerilis) yoke on his tender neck.
And finally, in reference to obedience and purity of faith, as in the words of the Lord to the prophet (cf. Jeremiah 1:6-8): "You are my child (puer), do not be afraid," spo- ken when Jeremiah had already left behind the years of childhood a long time before.
12. Puella is "little girl" (parvula), as if the term were 'chick' (pulla). Hence we use the term 'wards' (pupillus), not because of the legal status of wards, but because of their youthful age. A ward, named like the pupil (pupil- lus) of the eye, is one bereft of parents. Those truly called pupilli, however, are children whose parents died before giving them a name. Other 'bereft ones' (orbus) are called orphans (orphanus), the same as are those called pupilli; for orphanus is a Greek word and pupillus a Latin word. Thus in the psalm, where it is said (Psalm 9/10:14 Vulgate): "Thou wilt be a helper to the orphan (pupillus)," the Greek has the word òp??avóç. 
13. Those who have reached puberty (puberes) are so called from pubes, that is, the private parts, for this is the first time that this area grows hair. There are those who calculate puberty from age, that is, they take someone who has completed his fourteenth year to have reached puberty, even though he may begin to show the signs of
puberty very late; however, it is most certain that he who shows the outward signs of puberty and can already pro- create has reached puberty. 14. Puerpera are those who give birth at a youthful (puerilis) age. Whence Horace says (cf. Odes 4.5.23):
The young woman in labor (puerpera) is praised for her firstborn.
And they are called puerperae either because they are burdened with their 'first birth' (primus partus), or else because they first 'give birth to children' (pueros parere).
15. An adolescent (adolescens) is so called because he is 'old enough' (adultus, ppl. of adolescere) to procreate, or by derivation from 'growing' (crescere) and 'being strengthened' (augere). 16.A youth (iuvenis) is so called because he begins to be able to help (iuvare), just as we name the young bullocks (iuvencus) among oxen, when they have separated from the calves. A youth is at the peak of his development and ready to give assistance - for a person's 'helping' is his contributing some work. As in human beings the thirtieth year is the time of full maturity, so in cattle and beasts of burden the third year is the strongest.
17. A man (vir) is so called, because in him resides greater power (vis) than in a woman - hence also 'strength' (virtus) received its name - or else because he deals with a woman by force (vis). 18. But the word woman (mulier) comes from softness (mollities), as if mollier (cf. mollior, "softer"), after a letter has been cut and a letter changed, is now called mulier. 19. These two are differentiated by the respective strength and weak- ness of their bodies. But strength is greater in a man, lesser in a woman, so that she will submit to the power of the man; evidently this is so lest, if women were to resist, lust should drive men to seek out something else or throw themselves upon the male sex. 20. As I was say- ing, woman (mulier) is named for her feminine sex, not for a corruption of her innocence, and this is accord- ing to the word of Sacred Scripture, for Eve was called woman as soon as she was made from the side of her man, when she had not yet had any contact with a man, as is said in the Bible (cf. Gen. 2:22): "And he formed her into a woman (mulier)."
21. The term 'virgin' (virgo) comes from 'a greener (viridior) age,' just like the words 'sprout' (virga) and 'calf ' (vitula). Otherwise it is derived from lack of corruption, as if the word were formed from 'heroic
maiden,' because she has no knowledge of female desire.
22. A 'heroic maiden' (virago) is so called because she 'acts likea man' (vir + agere), that is, she engages in the activities of men and is full of male vigor. The ancients would call strong women by that name. However, a vir- gin cannot be correctly called a heroic maiden unless she performs a man's task. But if a woman does manly deeds, then she is correctly called a heroic maiden, like an Amazon.
23. She who is nowadays called a woman (femina) in ancient times was called vira; just as 'female slave' (serva) was derived from 'male slave' (servus) and 'female servant' (famula) from 'male servant' (famulus), so also woman (vira) from man (vir). Some people believe that the word for 'virgin' (virgo) is from vira. 24. The word 'woman' (femina) is derived from the parts of the thighs (femur, plural femora or femina) where the appearance of the sex distinguishes her from a man. Others believe that through a Greek etymology femina is derived from 'fiery force,' because she desires more vehemently, for females are said to be more libidinous than males, both in human beings and in animals. Whence among the ancients excessive love was called feminine (femineus) love.
25. The 'elder' (senior) is still fairly vigorous. In the sixth book Ovid speaks of the elder, who is (Met. 12.464)
Between the youth and the old man (senex). 
And Terence (The Mother-in-Law 11):
By the privilege I enjoyed when I was younger (adulescentior).
26. [Younger (adulescentior)] undoubtedly does not mean 'more grown up' (magis adolescens), but rather 'less grown up,' and in the same way 'elder' (senior) means 'less old,' where the comparative degree signifies less than the positive. Therefore, senior does not mean "fully old," just as 'rather young' (iunior, i.e. a compar- ative form, lit. "younger") means "among the youths," and 'rather poor' (pauperior, i.e. the comparative of pau- per, "poor") means "between rich and poor."
27. The term 'old man' (senex), however, some believe to be derived from decay of the senses (sensus), because from that time on they act foolishly due to old age.
Physiologists maintain that human beings are stupid due to colder blood, wise due to warm blood. Hence also old people, in whom blood has turned cold, and children, in whom it has not yet warmed up, are less wise. This is the reason why infancy and old age resemble one another: old people dote because they are too old, while children have no insight into their actions due to playfulness and childishness.
28. The term 'old man' (senex), however, is only mas- culine in gender, just as 'old woman' (anus) is feminine, for anus is exclusively said of a woman. 'Old woman,' moreover, is so called from many 'years' (annus), as if the word were 'full of years' (annosus). Indeed, if the word senex were a common noun (i.e. used of either gender), why then would Terence say (Eunuch 357): "Old woman (senex mulier)"? Similarly we say 'little old lady' (vetula), because she is 'aged' (vetusta). In like manner 'old age' (senectus) is derived from 'old man' (senex) and 'a woman's old age' (anilitas) from 'old woman' (anus).
29. 'Gray hair' (canities, also meaning "old age") comes from 'whiteness' (candor), as if the word were candities. Whence the following: "florid youth, milky old age (can- ities)," as if it said "white" (candidus) old age. 30. Old age brings with it much that is good and much that is bad. Much that is good, because it frees us from despotic mas- ters, imposes moderation on desires, breaks the drive of lust, augments wisdom, and imparts riper counsel. Much that is bad, however, because of the weakness and unpopularity it brings, for (Vergil, Geo. 3.67):
Diseases and sorrowful old age creep up.
Indeed, there are two things whereby the forces of the body are diminished, old age and disease.
31. Death (mors) is so called, because it is bitter (amarus), or by derivation from Mars, who is the author of death; [or else, death is derived from the bite (morsus) of the first human, because when he bit the fruit of the forbidden tree, he incurred death]. 32. There are three kinds of death: heartrending, premature, and natural death. That of children is heartrending, that of young people premature, that of old people merited, that is, natural. 33. However, it is uncertain from which part of speech mortuus ("dead, a dead person") is inflected. Indeed, as Caesar says, because it is the perfect participle
of morior ("die") it ought to end in -tus - that is, it ought to have one u only, not two. Where the letter u is dou- bled, it is inflected substantively, not as a participle, as in fatuus ("foolish") and arduus ("difficult"). This makes sense in this way: just as what mortuus means cannot be "declined" by any behavior of ours (i.e. we cannot avoid death), so the term itself cannot be "declined" grammat- ically.
Everyone who is dead is either a corpse (funus), or a cadaver. 34. It is a corpse if it is being buried. It is called funus from the ropes (funis) set on fire; these were carried before the bier in the form of papyrus reeds enveloped with wax. 35. The term cadaver, on the other hand, is used if the body lies unburied, for 'cadaver' (cadaver) comes from 'falling down' (cadere), because it cannot stand upright any more. While the cadaver is car- ried, we speak of it as the exsequiae; when cremated, the remains (reliquiae); when already interred, the buried (sepultum). However, in common usage a cadaver is still spoken of as a body (corpus, i.e. 'corpse'), as in the fol- lowing (Vergil, Geo. 4.255):
Then the bodies (corpus) of those deprived of the light.
36. The deceased (defunctus) is so called, because he has completed his part in life. Thus we say that those who have completed services they owed have 'discharged their duty' (functus officio); whence also the phrase 'having held (functus) public office.' Hence therefore 'defunct,' because such a person has been 'put aside from his duty' (depositus officio) in life, or else because he has fulfilled (functus) his number of days. 37. Buried (sepultus) is said of aperson who is already 'without pulse' (sinepulsu) and heartbeat, that is, without motion. To bury (sepelire) is to put a body out of sight, for we say 'inter' (humare) for covering over a body, that is, for throwing earth (humus) upon it.
iii. Portents (De portentis) 1. Varro defines portents as beings that seem to have been born contrary to nature - but they are not contrary to nature, because they are created by divine will, since the nature of every- thing is the will of the Creator. Whence even the pagans address God sometimes as 'Nature' (Natura), sometimes as 'God.' 2.A portent is therefore not created contrary to nature, but contrary to what is known nature. Portents are also called signs, omens, and prodigies, because they are seen to portend and display, indicate and predict
future events. 3. The term 'portent' (portentum) is said to be derived from foreshadowing (portendere), that is, from 'showing beforehand' (praeostendere). 'Signs' (ostentum), because they seem to show (ostendere) a future event. Prodigies (prodigium) are so called, because they 'speak hereafter' (porro dicere), that is, they predict the future. But omens (monstrum) derive their name from admonition (monitus), because in giving a sign they indicate (demonstrare) something, or else because they instantly show (monstrare) what may appear; and this is its proper meaning, even though it has frequently been corrupted by the improper use of writers.
4. Some portents seem to have been created as indi- cations of future events, for God sometimes wants to indicate what is to come through some defects in new- borns, and also through dreams and oracles, by which he may foreshadow and indicate future calamity for certain peoples or individuals, as is indeed proved by abundant experience. 5. In fact, to Xerxesa fox born ofa mare was a portent for the destruction of the empire. A monster to which a woman gave birth, whose upper body parts were human, but dead, while its lower body parts came from diverse animals, yet were alive, signified to Alexan- der the sudden murder of the king - for the worse parts had outlived the better ones. However, those monsters that are produced as omens do not live long - they die as soon as they are born. 6. There is a difference between a 'portent' (portentum) and 'an unnatural being' (por- tentuosus). Portents are beings of transformed appear- ance, as, for instance, is said to have happened when in Umbria a woman gave birth to a serpent. Whence Lucan says (Civil War 1.563):
And the child terrified its own mother.
But an unnatural beingstrictlyspeakingtakes the formof a slight mutation, as for instance in the case of someone born with six fingers.
7. Portents, then, or unnatural beings, exist in some cases in the form of a size of the whole body that sur- passes common human nature, as in the case of Tityos who, as Homer witnesses, covered nine jugers (i.e. about six acres) when lying prostrate; in other cases in the form of a smallness of the whole body, as in dwarfs (nanus), or those whom the Greeks call pygmies (pygmaeus), because they are a cubit tall. Others are so called due to the size of parts of their bodies, as for instance a mis- shapen head, or due to superfluous parts of their limbs,
as in the case of two-headed and three-headed individ- uals, or in the case of the cynodontes (i.e. "dog-toothed" people), who have a pair of projecting fangs. 8. Yet others are so called due to missing parts of the body, individuals in whom one corresponding part is deficient compared with the other, as when one hand is compared with the other hand and one foot with the other foot. Others due to a cutting off, as in the case of those born without a hand or without a head, whom the Greeks call stere- sios (cf. otsp?otç, "deprivation"). Others in the form of praenumeria, when only the head or a leg is born.
9. Others, who are transformed in a part of the body, as for instance those who have the features of a lion or of a dog, or the head or body of a bull, as they relate in the case of the Minotaur born of Pasiphae - what the Greeks call st?poµop??(c)a. Others become a portent due to a complete transformation into a different creature, as in the story of a woman who gave birth to a calf. Others, who have a change in the position of features without any transformation, such as those with eyes in their chest or forehead, or ears above their temples, or, as Aristotle relates, someone who had his liver on the left side and his spleen on the right. 10. Others, because of a joined begetting, as when in one hand several fingers are found joined at birth and fused together, and in the other hand fewer - and likewise with the feet. Others, with a feature that is premature and untimely, as those who are born with teeth or a beard or white hair. Others, with a complex ofseveral oddities, like the multiformed portent of Alexander's about which I spoke above (see section 5). 11. Others, from a mixing of sexes, like those they call the ?v6póyUvot ("androgynes") and spµa??po6±tat. Hermaphrodites are so named because both sexes appear in them, as in Greek `Epµ?ç signifies the male, %??po6(c)t? the female. These, having a male right breast and a female left breast, in sexual intercourse sire and bear children in turn.
12. Just as, in individual nations, there are instances of monstrous people, so in the whole of humankind there are certain monstrous races, like the Giants, the Cynocephali (i.e. 'dog-headed people'), the Cyclopes, and others. 13. Giants (Gigantes) are so called according to the etymology of a Greek term; the Greeks suppose that they are y?y?v?±ç, that is, "earthborn," because in their fable the parent Earth begot them as like itself, with their immense mass - for y? means "earth" and ysvoç "offspring." However, those whose parentage is
uncertain are also commonly called 'sons of the earth.'
14. But some, inexperienced with Holy Scripture (i.e. Genesis 6:4), falsely suppose that apostate angels lay with the daughters of humans before the Flood, and that from this the Giants were born - that is, excessively large and powerful men - and filled the earth. 15. The Cynocephali are so called because they have dogs' heads, and their barking indeed reveals that they are rather beasts than humans. These originate in India. 16. India also produces the Cyclopes, and they are called Cyclops because they are believed to have a single eye in the middle of their foreheads. These are also called ?ypto??ay±tat, because they eat only the flesh of wild animals.
17. People believe that the Blemmyans in Libya are born as trunks without heads, and having their mouth and eyes in their chest, and that another race is born without necks and having their eyes in their shoulders.
18. Moreover, people write about the monstrous faces of nations in the far East: some with no noses, having completely flat faces and a shapeless countenance; some with a lower lip so protruding that when they are sleeping it protects the whole face from the heat of the sun; some with mouths grown shut, taking in nourishment only through a small opening by means of hollow straws. Some are said to have no tongues, using nods or gestures in place of words. 19. They tell of the Panotians of Scythia, who have such huge ears that they cover all the body - for p?v is the Greek word for "all," and Yta means "ears."
20. The Artabatitans of Ethiopia are said to walk on all fours, like cattle; none passes the age of forty.
21. The Satyrs are little people with hooked noses; they have horns on their foreheads, and feet like goats' - the kind of creature that Saint Anthony saw in the wilder- ness. When questioned by the servant of God, this Satyr is said to have responded (Jerome, Life of Paul the Hermit 8; PL 23.23): "I am one of the mortals that dwell in the desert, whom the pagans, deluded by their fickle error, worship as Fauns and Satyrs." 22. There are also said to be a kind of wild men, whom some call Fauns of the fig. 23. The race of Sciopodes are said to live in Ethiopia; they have only one leg, and are wonderfully speedy. The Greeks call them omtopó6?ç ("shade-footed ones") because when it is hot they lie on their backs on the ground and are shaded by the great size of their feet.
24. The Antipodes in Libya have the soles of their feet twisted behind their legs, and eight toes on each foot.
25. The Hippopodes are in Scythia, and have a human
form and horses' hooves. 26. In India there are said to be a race called Mampóßtot, who are twelve feet tall. There, too, isa racea cubit tall, whom the Greeks from the term 'cubit' call pygmies (pigmaeus; cf. pUyµ?, "cubit"), of whom I have spoken above (section 7). They live in the mountainous regions of India, near the Ocean. 27. They claim also that in the same India is a race of women who conceive when they are five years old and do not live beyond eight.
28. Other fabulous human monstrosities are told of, which do not exist but are concocted to interpret the causes of things - like Geryon, the Spanish king fabled to have three bodies, for there were three brothers of such like minds that there was, so to speak, one soul in their three bodies. 29. And there are the Gorgons, harlots with serpentine locks, who would turn anyone looking at them into stone, and who had only one eye which they would take turns using. But these were three sisters who had a single beauty, as if they had a single eye, who would so stun those beholding them that they were thought to turn them into stone.
30. People imagine three Sirens who were part maid- ens, part birds, having wings and talons; one of them would make music with her voice, the second with a flute, and the third with a lyre. They would draw sailors, enticed by the song, into shipwreck. 31. In truth, how- ever, they were harlots, who, because they would seduce passers-by into destitution, were imagined as bringing shipwreck upon them. They were said to have had wings and talons because sexual desire both flies and wounds. They are said to have lived among the waves because the waves gave birth to Venus. 32. People tell of Scylla as a woman girded with the heads of dogs, with a great barking, because of the straits of the sea of Sicily, in which sailors, terrified by the whirlpools of waves rush- ing against each other, suppose that the waves are bark- ing, waves that the chasm with its seething and sucking brings into collision.
33. They also imagine certain monstrosities from among irrational living creatures, like Cerberus, the dog of the nether world that has three heads, signify- ing through him the three ages in which death devours a human being - that is, infancy, youth, and old age. Some think that he is called Cerberus as if the term were mp?oßópoç ("flesh-eating"), that is, devouring flesh.
34. They talk also of Hydra, a serpent with nine heads, which in Latin is called 'water-snake' (excetra), because
when one head was cut off (caedere) three would grow back. But in fact Hydra was a place that gushed out water, devastating a nearby city; if one opening in it were closed, many more would burst out. Seeing this, Hercules dried up the area, and thus closed the opening for the water. 35. Indeed hydra means "water" (cf. u6Yp). Ambrose makes mention of this in a comparison of it with heresies, say- ing (On Faith 1.4): "For heresy, like a certain hydra in the fables, grew from its own wounds, and as often as it would be cut down, it spread; it should be fed to the fire and will perish in a conflagration."
36. They also imagine the Chimaera as a tri-form beast: the face of a lion, the rear of a dragon, and a she-goat in the middle. Certain natural scientists of the Physiologus say that the Chimaera is not an animal but a mountain in Cilicia that nourishes lions and she-goats in some places, emits fire in some places, and is full of ser- pents in some places. Because the Physiologus made this the dwelling place of Bellerophon, he is said to have killed the Chimaera. 37. Their appearance gave their name to the Centaurs, that is, a man combined with a horse. Some say that they were horsemen of Thessaly, but because, as they rushed into battle, the horses and men seemed to have one body, they maintained the fiction of the Centaurs.
38. Again, the Minotaur took its name from 'bull' and 'man.' They say in their fables that a beast of this kind was enclosed in the Labyrinth. On this, Ovid (Art of Love 2.24):
The man half bull, and the bull half man.
39. The Onocentaur is so called because it seems to look half like a human, half like an ass. Likewise the Hip- pocentaur, which is thought to combine the natures of horse and human in itself.
iv. Metamorphoses (De transformatis) 1. There are accounts of certain monstrous metamorphoses and changes of humans into beasts, as in the case of that most notorious sorceress Circe, who is said to have trans- formed the companions of Ulysses into beasts, and the case of the Arcadians who, when their lot was drawn, would swim across a certain pond and would there be converted into wolves. 2. That the companions of Diomede were transformed into birds is not a lie from story-telling, but people assert this with historical con- firmation. Some people claim that witches (Striga) were transformed from humans. With regard to many types of crimes, the appearance of the miscreants is changed and they wholly metamorphose into wild animals, by means of either magic charms or poisonous herbs. 3. Indeed, many creatures naturally undergo mutation and, when they decay, are transformed into different species - for instance bees, out of the rotted flesh of calves, or beetles from horses, locusts from mules, scorpions from crabs. Thus Ovid (Met. 15.369):
If you take its curved arms from a crab on the shore a scorpion will emerge and threaten with its hooked tail.
