i. Tables (De mensis) 1. Daedalus was the first to make a table and a chair. The first to devise the equipment for cooking was a certain Apicius, who died by his own choice, after stuffing himself with dainties - and deservedly so, because he who is slave to his maw and to gluttony kills both the soul and the body. The word 'table' (mensa) was made from 'eating' (esus) and 'con- suming' (comesus), for a table has no other use. 2.A couch (torus) is so called from the twisted (tortus) grasses that are placed under the shoulders of those reclining on it. The 'semicircular couch' (stibadium) is named from log (stipes), as if it were stipadium, because it began as such. The 'large dining couch' (accubitum) is so called from food (cibus), as if it were 'for the food' (ad cibatum) of a banquet.
3. Among the Greeks a banquet (convivium) derives from the idea of 'drinking together' (compotatio), from their word potóç, "drink." But in Latin it is more cor- rectly derived from 'living in company' (convictus), or because there one has conversation about life (vita). Again, convivium from a multitude of 'people eating together' (convescentes), for a private table is for sus- tenance, but it is not a banquet. A banquet has three elements: reclining, eating, and drinking. Reclining, as (Vergil, Aen. 1.708):
Bidden to recline on the decorated couches.
Eating and drinking, as (cf. Vergil, Aen. 1.723)
After the first lull in the banquet, when the tables were removed, they set out great bowls and garland the wines.
ii. Foodstuffs (De escis) 1. Food (cibus) is so called because it is taken (capere) in the mouth, just as food- stuff (esca) because the 'mouth takes' (os capit) it. Vict- uals (victus) are rightly so called, because they sustain life (vita); hence to ask someone to dinner is termed to 'invite' (invitare). 2. Nourishment (alimonia) is so called
because the body is nourished (alere) by consuming it. Youths take nourishment in order to grow, the elderly to endure, for the flesh cannot subsist unless it is strength- ened with nourishment. Nutriment (alimentum) is that by which we are nourished (alere), and support (alimo- nium) is responsibility for nourishing.
3. Affluence (affluentia) is so named as if it were a 'pouring out' (effusio) of something overabundant, beyond what is enough, and there is no restraint. 4. Opu- lence (opulentia) is so called from'assistance' (ops), and if you examine it you will find that it observes moderation. For how can anything excessive be of assistance (opitu- lari), when too much is often more troublesome than too little? 5. 'Sumptuous meals' (epulae) are so called from the opulence (opulentia) of things. 'Ordinary meals' (epulae simplices) are divided into two necessary ele- ments, bread and wine, and two categories beyond these, namely, what people seek out for eating from the land and from the sea. 6. Feasts (dapes) are for kings, and epu- lae for private persons. Delicacies (deliciae) are so called because people are delighted (delectare) by them, and have a sweet tooth for them. 7. Pulmentum takes its name from puls ("gruel"); it is named correctly whether it is eaten in the form of gruel alone or whether something else is eaten in a mixture of gruel. 8. Satiety (satietas) and fullness (saturitas) are distinct, for satiety can be spoken of with regard to a single food, because it is enough (satis), but fullness takes its name from a 'mixed dish' (satura) that is made up of a varied preparation of foods.
9. Debauchery (crapula) is immoderate voracity, as if it were a 'raw meal' (cruda epula), by whose rawness the heart is burdened and the stomach is made to suf- fer indigestion. Now immoderate voracity is a vice, and only as much as is sufficient for sustenance and one's nature is healthy. 10. Breakfast (iantaculum, i.e. ientac- ulum) is the first food with which a fast (ieiunium) is broken - hence it is named. Nigidius (fr. 109): "We our- selves have violated fasts with light breakfasts." 11. Lunch (prandium) is named for the 'preparations for eating' (apparatus edendi). Hence the ancients properly called
the food for all the soldiers before battle 'lunch.' Hence the exhortation of the general, "Let us eat lunch like men about to dine in the infernal regions." 12. Merenda is a meal taken late in the day, as if it were 'to be eaten in the afternoon' (postmeridie edenda) and very close to dinner - hence it is also called antecenium (lit. "before dinner") by some people. Again, 'to partake of merenda' (merendare), as if it were 'to eat at midday' (meridie edere).
13. The term annona (lit. "provisions") derives from the time at which the ancient Romans would be sum- moned to meals. Thus Martial (Epigrams 4.8.6):
The ninth hour (nona; i.e. about 3:00 Pm) demands that we rumple the high couches.
The Persians still do this today. 14. Dinner (coena, i.e. cena) is named for the community of those eating, for the Greek for "common" is motvóç. Whence also the term 'communicants' (communicantes), because they gather in common (communiter), that is, on an equal basis. Among the ancients it was the custom to take meals in public view and to dine in community, lest dining alone beget excess. Also dinner is the evening (vespertinus) meal, which the ancients would call vesperna, for in their practice there were no lunches.
15. Bread (panis) is so called because it is served with all food, or because all living creatures crave it, for 'all' in Greek is p?v. Coarse bread (cibarius) is what is given as bread to slaves, and it is not refined. Leavened bread (fer- mentacius) is made with leaven. Unleavened bread (azy- mus) is not fermented, for the term ?SUµoç means "with- out yeast," unadulterated. Acrozymus is slightly leavened bread, as if it were acroazymus. 'White wheat' (siligineus) bread is named for its type of grain, for siligo is a kind of wheat. Toast (rubidus) is bread recooked and made red (rubefactus). Subcinericius is bread cooked on both sides on hot embers (cinis); it is also called hearth-bread (focacius). Clibanicius bread is baked in a pot. 16. Sponge (spungia, i.e. spongia) bread is a mixture that is softened for a good while in water, and takes in a small portion of fine flour and a small portion of yeast; it has more moisture than any other bread, whence it took the name of the sponge.
17. Placentae are breads made from spelt. Some peo- ple call them libum; they are so named because they are agreeable (libere) and pleasing (placere). 18. Sweet cakes (dulcis) are types of bread made by pastry-cooks, so
called from their taste, for they are eaten sprinkled with honey. Crust (crusta) is the surface of bread; another term for this is fragmenta (lit. "fragments") because the crust is divided up, as in 'broken pieces' (fracta, ppl. of frangere). Leaven (fermentum) is named from 'seething' (fervor), because it cannot be contained after the first hour, for it pushes out with its expansion. Meal (farina) and bran (furfur) are so called from spelt (far), whose chaff they are. 19. Starch (amolum, i.e. amylum), the best flour of farina, is very fine and is thrown out of the millwheels because of its lightness - hence its name, as if it were 'from the mill' (a mola). Wheat flour (sim- ila) . . . Mill dust (pollen) . . . 
20. Meats (carnes) are so called because they are flesh (caro); or, from "producing" (creare), whence they are also called mpsaç by the Greeks. Raw (crudus) meat, because it is gory (cruentus), for it has blood. 21. Cooked (coctus), [as if it were 'forced' (cogere, ppl. coactus), that is, acted upon (agere, ppl. actus) in a forceful way by fire or water, and fit for use in eating]. But also some- thing ripened over a long period of time is called by the same term. 22. Roasted (assus), something that is blazing hot, as though the word were arsum ("burnt"). Boiled (elixus), because it is cooked in water only, for water is called lixa because it is a solution (solutus) - wherefore also 'giving rein' (solutio) to desire is called debauch- ery (luxus, noun), and dislocated limbs are described as luxus (adj., "sprained"). 23. Fried (frixus) is so termed from the sound food makes when it is seared in oil. Spiced (salsus), as if it were 'sprinkled with salt' (sale asparsus), with the [three] middle syllables taken away. Rancid (rancidus) is named after its defect, because it makes meat harsh (raucus). 24. A cut (succidia) is meat set aside for later use, so called from butchering (succi- dendo).
Lard (lardum), because it is kept stored at home, for the ancients called their homes 'dwellings' (lar). In Gallic lard is called taxea, whence Afranius in Rosa (fr. 284):
The Gaul in his mantle, fed with fat lard (taxea).
25. Grease (axungia) is named from ointment (unctio). Suet (sebum) is named from pig (sus, ablative sue), as if it were suebum, because this animal has more fat. 26.A bit (offa) in its proper sense is a fragment cut by the teeth; its diminutive is offella (i.e. offula). So 'minced-meat
makers' (offarius) are cooks who cook with small pieces, that is, "in bits" (offatim). Hence the expression "a bit (offa, i.e. a sop) for barking dogs"; if it is tossed into a dog's mouth the dog is instantly satisfied, and is curbed and silenced. 27.A morsel (frustum) is so called because it is taken by the frumen, for the frumen is the upper part of the throat. 'Lean meat' (pulpa) is so called because for- merly it would be eaten mixed with gruel (puls). Hence also relish (pulmentarium) and pulmentum have their names.
28. Lucanica (i.e. a kind of sausage) is so called because it was first made in Lucania. Sausage (farcimen) is meat cut up into small bits, because with it an intestine is stuffed (farcire), that is, filled, with other things mixed in. 29. Hash (minutal) is so called because it is made of fish and stuffing and vegetables cut 'in small bits' (minu- tatim). Aphratum is a dish called 'foamy' (spumeum) in Latin, because ???póç in Greek means "foam." Martisium is made from fish in a mortar (mortarium), whence it is named. 30. Isocis is the name of a certain fish from which an isicium (i.e. a kind of stuffing, from insecare, "chop") was originally made, and although it is now made from another kind of fish, at the outset that fish gave it its name. 31. Galatica is named for its milky color, for the Greeks call milk y?2a. Meatballs (sphera) are named with this Greek word for their roundness, for whatever is round in shape is called o??a±pa in Greek.
32. Teachers of cooking have named broth (ius) after the word for 'law' (ius), because it is the determining factor in the seasoning of cooking. The Greeks call it zema (i.e. "decoction"). 33. Cheese (caseus) is so called because it "lacks whey" (carere serum), as if the word were careus, for all the whey is drawn out of it so that it can take shape under weights. Colostrum is the milk from a new mother, and is of neuter gender. 34. Milk (lac) is derived from a Greek term for its whiteness, for
the Greeks call something white 2?Umóç. Milk and blood are what nourish and what take in nourishment, for we are nourished by milk, and we live by blood. 35. The term 'rennet' (quactum) is as if the term were coactum ("cur- dled"), as if 'coagulated' (coagulatum), because when other things are mixed with rennet it coagulates them into another form.
36. Honey (mel) is froma Greek term (i.e. µs2t), which is shown to have its name from bees, for a bee in Greek is called µs2tooa. Formerly honey was from dew and was found in the leaves of reeds. Hence Vergil (Geo. 4.1):
Forthwith, the celestial gifts of honey from the air.
Indeed in India and Arabia honey is still found attached to branches, clinging like grains of salt. Nevertheless, all honey is sweet; Sardinian honey is bitter because of wormwood, with whose abundance the bees of that region are fed. The honeycomb (favus) is so called because it is eaten rather than drunk, for the Greeks say ??ay?±v for "eat."
37. Finally, physicians and those who write about the physiology of the human body, especially Galen in his book titled W?pot? inquo, say that the bodies of children, youths, and men and women of mature age burn with an innate heat, and that for these ages foods that increase heat are noxious, and that to take whatever things are cold for eating conduces to good health. Likewise for the elderly, on the contrary, who struggle with phlegm and cold, it helps to take warm foods and aged wines. 
iii. Drink (De potu) 1.A drink (potio) derives its name from Greek, for they call it pótoç. Water (aqua) is gen- erally so named because its surface is level (aequalis) - hence also 'the sea' (aequor, lit. any level expanse). We speak of water as fresh because it is not useful when it is aged, like wine, but when it is immediately drawn from a river, spring, or well, for it stinks when it is aged. 2. Wine (vinum) is so called because a drink of it speedily replen- ishes the veins (vena) with blood. Some call it Lyaeus, because it loosens (solvere) us from care. The ancients called wine venom (venenum), but after poison from a lethal sap was discovered they called the one thing wine, the other venom. Hence Jerome in the book he wrote On Preserving Virginity: "Thus growing girls should avoid wine as poison lest, on account of the fervent heat of their time of life, they drink it and die." Hence it is that Roman women would not use wine except on prescribed
days for ritual purposes. 3. We speak of merum when we mean "pure wine," for we call "plain" (merus) what- ever is pure and unadulterated, as plain (merus) water, mixed with nothing else at all. Hence also merenda (see ii.12 above), because in ancient times that was the time at which plain (merus) bread would be given to laboring servants - or, because at that time of day people 'took a siesta' (meridiare) alone and separately, not, that is, as at lunch and dinner, gathered at one table. Hence we think, furthermore, that the time of day which is after the mid- dle of the day is called afternoon (meridies), because it is pure.
4. Must (mustum) is wine drawn straight from the vat. It is thought to be called mustum because it has sediment and dirt mixed in it, for mus means "dirt," whence humus ("the ground"). The force of must's fer- menting is so great that it quickly shatters vessels filled with it, however sturdy they are, unless there is a vent.
5. Roseum is wine of a red color, for a rose (rosa) is red. But Aminean (Amineus) wine is as if it were without cinnabar (minium), that is, without red, for it is white. Amber-colored (sucinacius) wine is like the gem amber (sucina, i.e. sucinum), that is, of a tawny color. 6. Limpid (limpidus) wine, that is, clear, is so called from its resem- blance to water, as if it were lymphidum, because lympha is water. Turbid (turbidus) wine, as if it were terbidum, that is, mixed with earth (terra)- namely, its dregs. Faler- nian (Falernus) wine is named from the Falernian region of Campania, where the best wines originate.
7. Colatum wine takes its name from the vessel in which it is transported (cf. colum, "strainer"), but Gazean (Gazeum) wine names the region from which it is imported, for Gaza is a city in Palestine. The wine that is poured out as a libation and offered at an altar is called infertus. 'Polluted' (spurcus) is wine that may not be offered, or in which water is mingled, as if it were 'bastardized' (spurius), that is, unclean. 8. 'Hon- orary' (honorarius) wine is what is offered to kings and potentates to honor them. Cato, On His Own Innocence (1; i.e. Orations 73): "When Iwas a legate in the provinces, a great many people would give the praetors and con- suls 'honorary' wine. I never accepted it, not even as a private person." 9. Crucius (lit. "crucifying") wine is the sour wine that slaves drink.
Vinegar (acetum) is so called either because it is sharp (acutus), or because it is watery (aquatus), for wine min- gled with water quickly acquires this taste. Hence the
term 'tart' (acidus), as if the word were aquidus. 'Spiced' (conditus) wine is so called because it is not pure, and is blended with a mixture of coloring agents. 10. Lactatum is a drink made from milk (lac). Honey-wine (mulsum) is wine mixed with honey, for it is a drink made from water and honey, which the Greeks call µ?2(c)mpatov. 11. Wine- honey (oenomelum) is must mixed with honey and vig- orously stirred and shaken. Honey-water (hydromelum), so called because it ismade fromwaterand Matian apples (malum). Filtered (saccatus) wine is made of water mixed with the dregs of wine and filtered through a bag (sac- cus). Second-press wine (lorea) .  12. Vinegar-honey
(oxymeli) is so called because it is something made from a mixture of vinegar and honey (mel), whence it has a sweet-sour taste. 'Honey of roses' (rhodomelum) is so called because the honey is mixed with essence of rose. Water-mead (melicratum) is wine mixed with honey. 13. Mead (medus), as if it were melus, because it is made from honey (mel), just as calamitas is put for cadamitas. 'Burnt tartar' (faecula) is a decoction of plump grapes, cooked down to the thickness of honey and cooled, good for the stomach. 14. Raisin-wine (passum) is the liquid pressed from dried (passus) grapes. It is called passum from 'suffering' (pati, ppl. passus), for the dry grapes are beaten and cooked down, and from this raisin-wine is made. 'Reduced must' (defrutum) is so called because it is defrauded (defrudare), and in a way suffers fraud.
15. Reduced wine (carenum), because it lacks (carere) a part from boiling, for when a third part of the must is lost, what remains is carenum. The counterpart of this is sapa, which reduced by boiling goes down to a third.
16. Sicera is any drink apart from wine that can ine- briate a person. Although its name is Hebrew, it still has a Latin sound because it is made from the juice (sucus) of grain or fruits, or the fruit of palms is squeezed to a pulp; and the liquid, thick with the cooked produce, like juice, is strained, and the resulting drink is named sicera. 17. Beer (cervisia) is so called from Ceres, that is, from grain, for it is a drink made in various ways from seeds of grain. 18. Caelia beer is so called from 'heating' (calefacere), and it is a drink skillfully brewed from the juice of wheat. The strength of the germ of moistened grain is aroused by fire, and then it is dried, and after it has been ground to a meal it is mixed with mild juice
and, by its fermentation, a harsh taste and inebriating heat are added. This is made in the parts of Spain where there is no fertile place for producing wine.
Lees (fex, i.e. faex) are so called because they affix (adfigere, ppl. adfixus) themselves to the vats by settling out. 19. The sauce garum is a liquid made from fish, which formerly was made from the fish that the Greeks called y?poç, and although it is now made from any kind of fish it retains the original name that it had at its beginning. 20. Liquamen is so called because little fish dissolved in pickling brine liquefy (liquare) as that sauce. The liquid from liquamen is called salsugo or muria, but properly muria (i.e. "brine") is the name for water mixed with salt, to produce the taste of the sea (mare). 21. Juice (sucus) is the name for what is squeezed from a filter bag (saccus), like barley-water (ptisana). Barley-water, broth (zema), and decoction (apozema) are Greek words (i.e. ptto?v?, "barley-gruel"; Ssµa, "decoction"; ?póS?µa, "decoction").
iv. Dishes for food (De vasis escariis) 1. Dishes (vas) are so called from 'eating' (vesci), because food is served on them. Its diminutive is vascula, as if it were vescula.
2. Crockery (fictile) is so called because it is made and fashioned (fingere, ppl. fictus) from earth, for to fashion is to make, form, and mold, whence also potters (figulus) take their name. And a ceramic (fictilis) dish is not called 'fashioned' (fictus) because it is mendacious, but because it is shaped, so that it may have a certain form. Hence the Apostle says (cf. Romans 9:20): "Shall the thing formed (figmentum) say to him that formed (fingere) it: Why hast thou made me thus?" 3. Ceramic dishes are said to have been first invented on the island of Samos, made from white clay and hardened by fire, hence 'Samian dishes.' Afterwards it was discovered how to add red earth and to fashion vessels with red clay.
The use of ceramic dishes was more ancient than the practice of casting with bronze or silver, for the ancients had dishes of neither gold nor silver, but of pottery - such as the dolium devised for wine, the amphora for water, the hydria for baths, and other vessels that are either
made on the wheel or shaped by hand for human use.
4. Potter's clay (argilla) when fired is spoken of as 'pot- tery' (testa), because from being soft it is 'baked hard' (tosta), and it does not keep its original name, because it is not what it was. 5. Arretine (Arretinus) dishes are named for the Italian city Arretium (i.e. Arezzo), where they are made, and they are red. On these, Sedulius (Pref- ace to the Paschal Poem 16):
Vegetables which red pottery displays and serves.
6. Some think that Samian dishes got their name from Samos, a town of Greece. Others say that there is a white potter's earth from Italy, produced not far from Rome, that is called Samian. 7. Chased (caelatus) dishes are silver or gold, modeled inside and out with figures that stand out, so called from an engraver's burin (caelum), which is a kind of iron tool, which commonly is called a chisel (cilio). 8. Chrysendetus vessels are those inlaid with gold; the term is Greek (cf. ypUoóç, "gold"; sv6?±v "bind on"). Vessels in bas-relief (anaglypha) are those carved on top, for the Greek ?vY means "above," y2U???, "carving," that is, carved above.
9. A dish (discus) formerly was named scus after its resemblance to a shield (scutum); hence also 'salver' (scutella). Afterwards it was called discus because it 'gives food' (dare escas), that is, it serves it - from this also is 'those reclining at table' (discumbentes) - or else it is from the word 6(c)omtv (i.e. 6tom?±v, "throw"), that is, from the thing they throw (i.e. 6(c)omoç, "discus"). 10. Tableware (messorium) is so called from 'table' (mensa), as if it were mensorium. A parapsis is a four-sided dish with 'com- partments of equal size' (par apsis). A paten (patena), because it has a spreading, open (patere, present partici- ple patens) rim. 11. Platter (lancis, i.e. lanx) . . . Gavata (i.e. gabata, a kind of dish), because it is 'hollowed out' (cavare, ppl. cavatus), with g put for the letter c. Likewise also mussel-shell (conca, i.e. concha), but the former is 'hollowed out' (cavatus), the latter is hollow (concavus): the Greeks also make this distinction. A salver (scutella) is the diminutive of shield (scutum), because it resem- bles one. 12. An apophoreta is so named by the Greeks (i.e. ?po??óp?ta) from 'carrying fruits' (ferre pomum) or anything [else], for it is flat. 
A salt-cellar (salinum) is a vessel used for salt (sal). A sulzica is the same thing, as if it were salzica. A vine- gar cruet (acitabulum), as if the word were acetaforum, because it 'carries vinegar' (acetum ferre). 13. Spoons
(coclear) are so called because they were first used for snails (coclea). Hence is the old distich (Martial, Epi- grams 14.121):
I am used for eating snails, but I am no less useful for eggs. Pray, do you know why for preference I am called a cocleare?
14. Trisceles, in the Greek (i.e. tptom?2?ç, "three-legged"), are tripods (tripus) in Latin. Those that stand on four legs are called 'tripods' with incorrect usage. 15. In vessels three pleasing qualities are sought: the workmanship of the maker, the weight of the silver, and the sheen of the metal.
v. Drinking vessels (De vasis potatoriis) 1. A cup (poculum) is named from 'drinking' (potare), for it is any vessel customarily used for drinking. A phiala (i.e. a shallow drinking bowl) is so called because it is made of glass, for 'glass' in Greek is ua2oç. 2. A patera is a phiala so called either because we usually drink (potare) from it, or because they are 'wide open' (patere) with wide rims.
3. A mixing-bowl (cratera) is a vessel with two handles. It is a Greek term (i.e. mpat?p, masc., "mixing-bowl"), but they decline it crater in the masculine gender, and in Latin it is cratera, feminine. Whence Persius (Satires 2.51):
If for you bowls (cratera) of silver;
and Vergil (cf. Aen. 1.724):
They set out great bowls (crater) and they garland the wines.
They were first made from woven twigs, whence they are called craterae from the mpat?±v ("hold fast"), that is, because they hold together mutually.
4. There is also the ladle (cyathus), the goblet (scy- phus), and the drinking-bowl (cymbium) - these are types of cups. Of these, the cup cymbium is so called from its resemblance to the boat called cymba. An amys- tis (cf. ?-, "without," µá?tv, "close (i.e. the mouth)") is a kind of cup from which one drinks in one draught, that is, in one breath. The cup called baccea (i.e. bacchia) was first named from Bacchus, that is, wine, and after- wards the usage was transferred to mean a water vessel.
5. Chalices (calix) and wine-cups (calathus) and the scala are types of cups formerly made of wood, and hence so called, for the Greeks would call any wood m?2ov. An
ampulla (ampulla) is as if the word were a 'large bubble' (ampla bulla), for it has the spherical shape of bubbles that are made from foaming water and thus are inflated by the wind.
vi. Wine and water vessels (De vasis vinariis et aquariis) 1. An oenophorum is a vessel carrying wine, for the word o­voç means "wine." Concerning this (Lucilius, Satires, fr. 139):
The bottom of the wine jug (oenophorum) is upended, and so is our idea.
2. Flascae are named from a Greek word (cf. ??2?om?, "flagon"). They were first made for carrying and storing phialae (see v.1 above), whence they were named. Later they passed into use for wine, but keeping the Greek term with which they had their origin. 3. Flagon (lagoena) and Sicula (lit. "Sicilian") are Greek words, partly changed as they became Latin, for they say 2?y?voç, we, lagoena; they, Ctm?2?, we, Sicula. Tankard (cantharus) . . . 
4. A hydria is a kind of water pot named from its derivation, for the Greeks call water u6Yp. Bucket (sit- ula), because it is of use to the thirsty (sitientes) for drinking; the Greeks call this vessel a m?6oç. 5. A pot (catinum) is a ceramic vessel, and it is used more appro- priately in the neuter rather than the masculine gender, just as we call the vessel for salt a salt-cellar (salinum, neuter gender). An orca is a kind of amphora; from its lesser term, urceus, comes the diminutive term urceo- lus. Scyphus, in which we wash our hands. 6. A seriola is a straight-sided type of tun, or a ceramic wine ves- sel first invented in Syria - just as Cilicises are named from Cilicia, from where they were [also] first imported. 'Large jar' (dolium) .  7. Cask (cupus and cupa) is so
called from 'taking' (capere), that is, receiving, water or wine - hence also innkeepers (caupo). Wineskin (uter), from 'womb' (uterus). Milking-pail(mulgarium) is a ves- sel into which livestock are milked, and with the same meaning mulctrum, because milk is milked (mulgere, ppl. mulctus) into it. 8. A basin (labrum) is so called because the bathing (labatio, i.e. lavatio) of infants is usually done in it; its diminutive is labellum. Likewise albeum, because ablutions (ablutio) are usually done in it. A laver (pelvis) is so called because the feet (pes) are washed (lavare) there. 9. One vessel is called a siphon (sifon, i.e. sipho, "hose") because it pours out water when air is blown (sufflare) into it. They use these in the East,
for when they realize that a house is burning they run with siphons filled with water and extinguish the fire, and they also clean ceilings with water forced upwards from siphons.
vii. Vessels foroil(Devasisoleariis) 1.A hemicadium is a vessel for oil. A scortia is a vessel for oil, so called because it is made of leather (corium). 2. An alabastrum isa vessel for ointments, and is named from the kind of stone of which it is made, which they call alabaster (alabastrites), which keeps ointments unspoiled. 3. A pyx (pyxis) is a little container for ointment made of boxwood, for what we call 'boxwood' the Greeks call pá(oç. 4.A lenticula is a little vessel for oil, made of bronze or silver, so called from 'anointing' (linire), for with these kings and priests would be anointed.
viii. Cooking vessels (De vasis coquinariis) 1. Any ves- sel intended for cooking (coquere) is called coculum. Plautus (fr. 181):
Every mercy is boiled out of me in bronze pots (coculum).
2. A pot (olla) is so called because in it water put on the fire 'bubbles up' (ebullire), as vapor is released upwards. From ebullire also derives the word 'bubble' (bulla), which is supported in the water by the breath of air within. A small pan (patella), as if the word were patula ("spread out"), for it is an olla witha rather open (patere) rim. 3. The caccabus and the kettle (cucuma) are named after the sound of boiling. These have a common name in Greek and Latin (cf. m?mmaßoç, "three-legged pot"), but whether the Latins borrowed these terms from the Greeks, or the Greeks from the Latins, is uncertain. 4. Bronze cauldrons (lebes) are named from a Greek word (i.e. 2sß?ç, "cauldron"); they are smaller ollae, adapted for use in cooking. 5. The frying pan (sartago) is so called from the sizzling (strepitus) sound that comes when oil is heated in it. Tripods (tripus) are so called because they stand on three feet (tres pedes); the Greeks call them tripodae (i.e. tp(c)poUç, "three-legged cauldron"). 6. A hand-mill (mola), so called from its round shape, as of apples (malum) among the fruits; the Greeks have the same name for it (i.e. µá2?, "hand-mill"). The sieve (cribrum), so named because there the 'grain runs'
(currere frumentum), as if the word were currifrum. The fire-shovel (rutabulum) is so called from 'tossing' (proruere) dung, or fire, for the sake of cooking bread.
ix. Storage containers (De vasis repositoriis) 1.A gazo- phylacium is a strongbox in a temple where what is given for the needs of the poor is gathered. The term is a composite from Persian and Greek, for gaza in Per- sian means "treasury," and ??U2?mtov in Greek means "custody." 2. A strongbox (arca) is so called because it prevents (arcere) and prohibits seeing inside. From this term also derive 'archives' (arcivum, i.e. archivum) and 'mystery' (arcanum), that is, a secret, from which other people are 'fended off' (arcere). 3. Cibutum is the Greek word (i.e. mtßYtóç, "box, ark") for what we call arca. A loculus is a place (locus) made in the ground for storing something or for protecting clothes or money, and it is so called from the diminutive (i.e. of locus). 4. A coffer (mozicia), as if it were modicia, whence also the word 'a little' (modicum), with z for d, as the people of Italy are wont to say ozie for hodie. Scrinium (i.e. a container for book scrolls)  5. Bag (saccus) is so called from the word
'blanket' (sagum), because it is made by sewing one up, as if the word were sagus.
A pouch (marsuppium) is a little bag for money, which the Greeks call µapo(c)ptov ("pouch") - for certain Greek words are changed a little in Latin because of Roman pronunciation. 6. The sitarcia (i.e. knapsack), used by sailors, is so called because it is 'sewn' (suere, ppl. sutus). A wrapper (involucrum) is so called because it contains something 'rolled up' (involvere, ppl. involutus) in it. 7. The fiscus is the public purse, whence also terms for 'bas- ket' (fiscella and fiscina). Tax-collectors have one of these and put in it the public dues that are paid to kings. Fis- cus is the primary term, with the derivative fiscina and the diminutive fiscella. 8.A wicker-basket (canistrum) is woven from split reeds (canna), whence it is named; oth- ers claim that it is Greek (cf. m?vtotpov, "wicker basket"). A chest (cistella) is named from the ribs (costa) of reed or wood from which it is constructed. 9.A basket (cophi- nus) is a container made from twigs, used for cleaning up dung and carrying dirt. The Psalmist speaks of it before Israel (Psalm 80:7, Vulgate): "His hands had served in baskets (cophinus)." It is also pronounced covinus, as if the word were covus, that is, 'hollow' (cavus). 10. Pan- niers (corves, i.e. corbes), because they are woven from bent (curvare) twigs. Hamper (sporta), either because
they are usually made from broom (spartum), or because they carry (exportare) something. [Sporta is so called from spartum, not from exportare as some would have it, for they were formerly made of broom.]
x. Lamp vessels (De vasis luminariorum) 1. The ancients used the word 'fireplace' (focus) from tending the fire and wood, for ???ç in Greek means "fire" in Latin. According to some philosophers all things were procreated from fire. And indeed, without heat nothing is born, so that as [the poet] says of the northern regions (Lucan, Civil War 4.108):
In their barren cold they produce nothing.
But Varro says they are called fireplaces (focus) because they nurture (fovere) the fire, for the fire is the flame itself, and whatever keeps a fire burning is called a fireplace, whether it be an altar or something else on which the fire is kept burning. 2. An oil-lamp (lucerna) is so called from lynchnus ("lamp"). The syllable lu- is short, as in the line of Persius (Satires 5.181):
The lamps (lu?cernae) placed about threw out a greasy cloud.
But if the word were derived from 'light' (lu¯x, with long u) the verse would not scan. Wick (licinius, lit. "lint"), as if it were 'glowworm' (lucinius), for it is the glowworm of a lamp. 3.A candlestick (candelabrum) is so called from 'candle' (candela), as if it were candelaforum, because it carries (ferre) a candle. The wax taper (cereus) takes its name by derivation from 'wax' (cera), from which it is made. Of it, a certain poet (cf. Martial, Epigrams 14.42):
Here as a taper (cereus) I will supply nightly fire for you, [for] when the daylight has been stolen, I am another light for you.
4. A lacunarium is a hanging lamp, as if it were luca- narium, that is, beaming (lucere) in the air.
5. 'Wax torches' (funale) are covered with wax, and are so called from the cords (funis) encased in wax that our ancestors employed before the use of papyrus. From this term also comes 'funeral rites' (funus). The Greeks call these torches scolaces (i.e. omó2am?ç), because they are scoliae (i.e. omo2tóç, "twisted"), that is, twisted; the Romans called these things cords and wax torches. The ancients had chandeliers (funale candelabrum) with hooked prongs sticking out, to which were attached
cords daubed with wax or a material of the kind that would feed the light. Such pointed prongs were thus likewise called funalia. 6.A lamp (lampas) is a flame that gives light at the top, and is so called because it seems to display a flickering (lambere) motion. The firebrand (fax, gen. facis) is so called because it starts (facere, lit. "makes") the hearth-fire (focus); its diminutive is fac- ula. 7. The lantern (lanterna) is so called because it has enclosed a 'light within' (lux interius). It is made of glass, with its light shut up inside so that a puff of wind can- not get at it, and so that it may easily be carried around anywhere to give light.
8. A lucubrum is so called because it 'sheds light in shadow' (lucere in umbra), for it is a small light usually made from a bit of tow and wax. 9.A pyre (pyra) is what is customarily built up from logs in the form of an altar so that it will burn, for pup means "fire." Now a pyre is a gathering of wood that is not yet burning; a rogus, one that has begun to burn; but a bustum is the name for one already 'burned up' (exurere, ppl. exustus, cf. comburere, ppl. combustus, "burn up"). 10.A lighthouse (farum, i.e. pharos) is a very tall tower, which the Greeks (i.e. ???poç) and the Latins both call farum in accordance with its function, because the signal of its flame may be seen by sailors from afar, as we have said above (see XV.ii.37). Such a lighthouse Ptolemy is said to have constructed near Alexandria for eight hundred talents. Its purpose is to shine a light for the nighttime sailing of ships in order to mark the shallows and the entrances to the harbor, so that sailors might not, misled by darkness, hit the rocks, for Alexandria has tricky entrances with deceptive shoals. Therefore they call the device built in a harbor to serve for lighting the way pharos, for ???ç means "light," ópoç means "vision." Hence also Lucifer (i.e. the 'Light- bearer') in Greek is called ?Yo??ópoç.
xi. Beds and chairs (De lecticis et sellis) 1. Lecticae are so called from gathered (legere, ppl. lectus) straw. A coverlet (stratus) is named from spreading (sternere, ppl. stratus), as if the word were 'matted' (storiatus; cf. storia below). The ancients would lie in these alone for sleeping, because woolen blankets were not yet invented.
Straw mat (storia), because it is spread (strata) on the ground. 2. A cot (cama) is low and close to the ground, for the Greeks say yaµa(c) (lit. "on the ground") for 'low.' A couch (cubile) is a place for lying down (cubare). 'Pal- let' (grabatum) is a Greek term. A camp-bed (baian- ula) is a bed that is hauled (baiulare) on a trip, from 'hauling,' that is, carrying. 3. A 'cushioned couch' (pul- vinar) is a couch for the wealthy; hence also 'pillow' (pulvillus). Spinga (i.e. sphinga) beds are those on which there are images of sphinxes, which we call griffins. Punic (Punicanus) beds are small, low beds first imported from Carthage, and hence named. 4. Lectica is the name for a 'bed with a back' (pluteus lectus). Concerning these, Rutilius Rufus says in On His Own Life (13): "First, con- trary to the custom of generals, he would use couches with backs (lectica) in preference to couches without backs (lectus)." 5. The frame (sponda) is the outer part of a bed, the backboard (pluteus) the inner.
Bridal (genialis) beds properly speaking are those spread for young brides, so called from begetting (gener- are) children. 6. A cradle (cunabula) is a little bed in which infants usually lie, so called because they are used for a new-born, as if it were cynabula - for mU?±v means "to give birth" in Greek. 7. A bier (feretrum) is so called because the dead are 'carried off' (deferre) on it, and it is a Greek word, for ??sp?tpov is taken from ??sp?tv, that is, from carrying (ferre). In Latin a coffin (capulus) is so called because it is carried above people's heads (caput). Thus Plautus says (The Braggart Soldier 628): "Coffin-bound (capularis) old man," that is, nearly in his coffin. 8. Stools (scamnum) are set against very high beds, and are so called from 'climbing' (scandere), [that is, mounting (ascendere)]. Hence also 'footstools' (sca- billum), which are set by small beds or chairs for mount- ing. The footstool is also called a subpedaneum, for what the Greeks call úpopó6tov Latin speakers call scabillum, and others [call] suppedaneum, because it is 'under the feet' (sub pedes). A scansilium is a step (e.g. a bench in an amphitheater) where a distinguished person takes his seat. 9. Seats (sedes) are so called because among the ancient Romans there was not the practice of reclining at table, and hence they were said to 'sit down' (considere). Afterwards, as Varro says in On the Life of the Roman People, men began to recline and women to sit, because reclining was seen as unseemly for a woman.
The word 'seat' (sedis, i.e. sedes) in the singular num- ber properly belongs to kingship, and in Greek is called
9póvoç. The Greeks say thronus, and we say solium. But for other people, there are 'benches' (subsellium); for scholars, 'chairs' (cathedra). 10. The throne (solium), on which kings sit for the safety of their bodies, is so called, according to some, for its 'solidity' (soliditas), as if it were solidum; according to others the word is formed by anti- stichon (i.e. by antistoechum, "substitution of letters") as if the word were sodium, from 'sitting' (sedere). Hence likewise sella (i.e. another word for 'seat') is so called as if it were sedda, and benches (subsellium) as if the word were subseddium. 11. The 'curule chair' (sella curulis) is where magistrates would sit (sedere) to render justice. They are called 'curule' because, among the ancients, praetors and consuls would be carried to the forum by a chariot (currus) due to the length of the journey. The chairs that were carried after them, from which while sitting they would render justice, were named 'curule' chairs from 'chariot.' 12. Tripods (tripus) are stools hav- ing 'three feet' (tres + pes; tpt- + poáç). But lampstands are also tripods because they likewise have three feet.
xii. Vehicles (De vehiculis) 1. A wagon (carrum) is so called from the axle (cardo) of its wheels, and hence 'chariot' (currus) is named, for it is seen to have wheels. A wheel (rota) is so called because it rushes (ruere), and 'round' (rotundus) is named from rota. 2. A reda is a kind of vehicle with four wheels. The ancients called these retae, because they had wheels (rota). 3. A carpen- tum pompaticum (i.e. a processional carriage) is a type of vehicle, as if it were a carrum pompaticum. A cart (plaustrum) is a two-wheeled vehicle that carries bur- dens, and is called plaustrum because it rolls, as if one said pilastrum (cf. pila, "ball."). A caracutium is a vehicle with very high wheels, as if it were a 'high wagon' (car- rum acutum). A capsus is a carriage enclosed on all sides, as if it were a box (capsa). 4. A pilentum or petorritum is an enclosed carriage with four wheels that matrons formerly used. Vergil (Aen. 8.666):
Mothers in soft carriages (pilentum).
Horace (Satires 1.6.104):
Many grooms and nags to be grazed, and carriages (petorritum) to be drawn.
Formerly the pilentum was of a blue color and not, as it now is, red. Unless they were chaste, matrons could not use these; nor, likewise, could they wear fillets. 5. A 
basterna is a vehicle [for a journey, as if the term were viae sternax ("smoother of the way"), fitted with soft rugs and drawn by two animals].
xiii. Other implements that we use (De reliquis quae in usu habentur) 1. The walking stick (baculus) is said to have been invented by Bacchus, the discoverer of the grape vine, so that people affected by wine might be supported by it. As baculus is from Bacchus, so a 'rod' (bacillum) is from baculus, as its diminutive. 2. Stakes (fustis) are so called because they 'stand fixed' (praefixae stare) in the ground. Country people call these 'palings' (palus), and for their misdeeds youths are beaten with them. Levers (vectis) are so called because they are car- ried (vectare) in the hands; with these, doors or stones are loosened. 3. The term forfex is treated in accordance with its etymology: if it is so called from 'thread' (filum), the letter f is used, as in tailors' scissors (forfex); if from 'hair' (pilus), the letter p, as in a barbers' tweezers (forpex); if from 'snatching out' (accipere), the letter c, as in black- smiths' tongs (forceps), because they 'seize the hot thing' (formum capere). 4. The ancients called a hot thing for- mus, and hence also the term formosus ("beautiful"; see XIX.vii.3).
A razor (novacula) [is so called because it 'renews' (innovare) one's face]. Combs (pecten) are so called because they make hair combed (pectere) and arranged. A curling iron (calamistrum) is a pin that, when heated (calefacere) and applied, heats and curls one's hair. Hence also people who wave their hair are called 'crimped' (calamistratus). 5. The key (clavis) is so called because it closes (claudere) and opens. A catenatum (lit. "chained thing"- a latch?), becauseit'holdsbygrasping'(capiendo tenere). A clock (horologia) is so called because there 'we read the hours' (horas legere), that is, we deduce them. It is set up in sunny places, where the shadow from the gnomon runs across the incised lines to show what hour of the day it is.
xiv. Rural implements (De instrumentis rusticis) 1.A plowshare (vomer) is so called because it 'digs up the ground by force' (vi humum eruat), or from its 'spewing forth' (evomere) earth. Concerning it, Lucretius (On the Nature of Things 1.314):
The iron hook of the plow, the plowshare (vomer), insensibly erodes in the fields.
It gets its shine from abrasion. 2. The plow (aratrum) is named from 'plowing the earth' (arare terram), as if the word were araterrium. The plow-beam (buris) is a curved part of a plow, so called as if it were ßoòç oùp? ("ox's tail"), because it looks like an ox's tail. The share- beam (dentale) is the foremost part of a plow, in which the plowshare is drawn along, as if it were a tooth (dens).
3. Pruning knives (cultellus) are so called from 'cultivat- ing' (cultura), because the ancients did their pruning of trees and vines with them before pruning hooks were invented. 4. The pruning hook (falcis, i.e. falx) is used to prune trees and vines; it is called falcis because at first soldiers would use them to cut bracken (filix). Hence the verses (Martial, Epigrams 14.34):
The settled peace of our general has bent me for gentle uses: now a farmer owns me; before, I belonged to a soldier.
5. A bush-hook (falcastrum) is named for its likeness to a pruning hook (falx), and it is a curved iron blade with a long handle, used for clearing briar-patches. These are also called 'weeding hooks' (runco), which cut back thorn-bushes, named from 'weeding' (runcare).
6. A serrula (lit. "small saw") is a very thin blade of iron that cuts trees or branches with the biting action of its teeth. Drag-hoes (rastrum), too, are so called either from scraping (radere) the ground or from the sparseness (rar- itas) of their teeth. Mattocks (ligo), because they 'lift up' (levare) earth, as if the word were levo. 7. A spade (scu- dicia) is so called because it loosens the ground around the 'base of the plant' (codex), and although it is used for other work it still keeps its name from codex. Oth- ers name it with the general term 'digger' (fossorium), because it makes a pit (fovea), as if it were fovessorium. 8. A hoe (sarculus)- of these there are the single-bladed and the two-pronged. Farmers call the forked iron instru- ment with which seeds are planted (pangere) a 'dibble' (pastinatum, i.e. pastinum). Hence old vines that are trenched again are said to be 're-dug' (repastinare).
9. A roller (cylindrus) is a stone rounded off in the shape of a column, and it takes its name from its cylin- drical shape. Of it, Vergil (Geo. 1.178):
First the threshing floor should be leveled with a huge roller (cylindrus) and turned over by hand.
10. A threshing-sledge (tribula) is a kind of vehicle used as a means of threshing (terere), and so called from
this. A winnowing-shovel (pala), commonly called a 'winnowing-fan' (ventilabrum), is named for its win- nowing (ventilare) chaff (palea). 11. Pitchforks (furcilla) are so called because with them 'grain is shifted' (fru- mentum cellere, i.e. cillere), that is, is moved. In the same way 'little masks' (oscillum) are so called because their 'faces are moved' (os + cillere)- for cillere means "move."
12. Tallies (tessera) are objects with which the number of
grain-measures is designated.
A trapetum is a mill for olives. A prelum is a beam with which trodden grapes are pressed, so called from pressing, as if it were a pressorium (i.e. a press; cf. pre- mere, ppl. pressus, "press"). A prelum is the device with which 'oil is pressed' (premitur oleum). A vat (lacus), the receptacle into which what has been made liquid (liqua- tus, ppl. of liquare) flows, where oil or wine is extracted from olives or grapes by means of pressing. 13. Verennis (an unidentified implement), from 'carry' (vehere), that is, to bring out. Qualus,a wicker basket (corbis), and the strainer (colum) of the wine press, through which the must flows, are so called from 'straining' (colare). The sieve (fisclum), as if it were fiscolum, is so called from its straining (colare) oil, or as if it were a 'little basket' (fiscella) for oil.
xv. Garden implements (De instrumentis hortorum)
1. The waterwheel (rota) is so called as if the word were ruta (i.e. from ruere, "rush," ppl. rutus), and it is the machine by which water is drawn from a stream. Lucretius (cf. On the Nature of Things 5.516):
We may see the waterwheels (rota) and their scoops (austrum) turn in the stream.
The austra (i.e. haustrum, "scoop of a waterwheel"), that is, the waterwheel, is so called from 'drawing' (haurire, ppl. haustus) water. 2. A pulley (girgillus) is so called because it moves in a circle (gyrus). It is a movable block of wood on a transverse beam from which a rope with a bucket or leather bag is let down into a well to draw water. 3. Gardeners call the long beam with which they draw water a telo (cf. tolleno, "swing-beam"), and it is so called because of its length, for whatever is long is called t?2óv in Greek (cf. t?2?, t?2ou, "far off") - hence also they say 'weasel' (mustela) as if it were a 'long mouse' (mus). The people of Spain call this instrument a 'stork'
(ciconia) because it acts like the bird of the same name, raising its beak from the water and dipping it, while it makes its clamor. Water-bucket (ama, i.e hama) . . . 
4. The 'wolf' (lupus) or 'little dog' (canicula) is an iron grapple that takes such names because if anything falls in a well it snatches them and draws them out. The grapple (arpax, i.e. harpago, ?ppa(, "grappling iron") is so called because it 'snatches' (arripere), for arpe in Greek means "to seize" (cf. ?pp?, "bird of prey"; ?pp?S?tv, "seize"). 'Hoe' (sarculus; see xiv.8 above) . . .
xvi. Equestrian equipment (De instrumentis equo- rum) 1. Medallions (phalerae) are ornamental bosses worn by horses; the term is Greek (i.e. ???2apov, "cheek- medallion"). Bits (frenum) are so called because they force horses to neigh (fremere), or because horses gnash (frendere), [that is, imprint,] and bite at them with their teeth. Hence still-suckling piglets are called 'toothless' (nefrens) because they cannot yet 'gnash' anything, that is, tear it up, with their teeth. Hence also a 'fava bean' (faba) that is ground up is called 'mashed' (fresa, ppl. of frendere). 2. A very harsh type of bit is the 'wolf- toothed' (lupatus), so called from having uneven teeth like wolves' (lupinus) teeth; consequently its 'bite' is a powerful curb. Muzzle (camus).  3. The rein (habena)
is so called from 'hold' (habere), because we hold, that is, we restrain horses with them; hence also horses are said to be habilis ("controllable"). It is also called a retinac- ulum, from 'holding back' (retinere). Reins (lorum) . . . 
4. Halters (capistrus, i.e. capistrum) are so called from the heads (capita) of pack animals. Saddle (sella) from 'sitting' (sedere), as if the word were sedda. The chest- strap (antela), as if it were antesella (i.e. "in front of the saddle") and likewise the tail-strap (postela), as if it were postsella (i.e. "behind the saddle").
The belt (cingulum) of a human is neuter in gen- der, but we speak of the girths (cingula) of animals in the feminine. 5. A packsaddle (sagma), which is incor- rectly called salma by common people, is so named from its covering of coarse blanket (sagum), whence a pack- horse is called sagmarius, and a mule, sagmaria. A lasso (capulum) of rope, from 'capturing' (capere), because untamed pack animals are caught with them. 6. Spurs (calcar) are so called because they are bound to a per- son's heel (calx), that is, on the back part of the foot, for goading horses either to fight or to run, on account of animals' laziness or fear. Goads (stimulus) are so called
from the word 'fear' (timor), although there is also the goad of desire.
7. Currycombs (strigilis) are named from 'grooming' (tergere), because horses are groomed with them. A 'branding iron' (character) is a heated iron instru- ment that burns marks on livestock, for yapamt?p ("brand, shape") in Greek means "shape" in Latin.
8. A 'cauterizing iron' (cauterium), as if the word were cauturium, because it burns (urere), and a forewarning and severe cautioning (cautio) is branded on the animal so that greed may be restrained when the owner is iden- tified. Sometimes this instrument is used for the brand and sometimes to cure, so that the vigor of a disease may be dried out by the heat of the fire.
