i. The Old and New Testament (De Veteri et Novo Tes- tamento) 1. The Old Testament is so called because it ceased when the New came. The apostle Paul reminds us of this, saying (II Corinthians 5:17): "Old things have passed away, and behold, new things have come about."
2. One testament is called New (Novus) because it inno- vates (innovare). Indeed, the only ones who come to know it are those who are renewed (renovatus) from the old by grace and who belong now to the New Testament, which is the kingdom of heaven.
3. The Hebrews take the Old Testament, with Ezra as its redactor, as consisting of twenty-two books, corre- sponding to the number of letters in their alphabet. They divide these books into three classes: Law, Prophets, and Sacred Writings. 4. The first class, Law (Lex), is taken as being five books: of these the first is Bresith,1 which is Genesis; second Veelle Semoth, which is Exodus; third Vaiicra, which is Leviticus; fourth Vaiedabber, which is Numbers; fifth Elleaddebarim, which is Deuteronomy.
5. These are the five books of Moses, which the Hebrews call Torah (Thora), and Latin speakers call the Law. That which was given through Moses is properly called the Law.
6. The second class is of Prophets (Propheta), in which are contained eight books, of which the first is Josua Benun, called Iesu Nave in Latin (i.e. the book of Joshua 'ben Nun,' the son of Nun). The second is Sophtim, which is Judges; third Samuel, which is First Kings; fourth Malachim, which is Second Kings; fifth Isaiah; sixth Jeremiah; seventh Ezekiel; eighth Thereazar, which is called the Twelve Prophets, whose books are taken as one because they have been joined together since they are short.
7. The third class is of Sacred Writings (Hagiographa), that is, of 'those writing about holy things' (sacra scribens; cf. ?ytoç, "holy"; yp????tv, "write"), in which
there are nine books: first Job; second the Psalter; third Masloth, which is the Proverbs of Solomon; fourth Coheleth, which is Ecclesiastes; fifth Sir has- sirim, which is the Song of Songs; sixth Daniel; seventh Dibre haiamim, which means 'words of the days' (verba dierum), that is Paralipomenon (i.e. Chronicles); eighth Ezra; ninth Esther.
All together these books - five, eight, and nine - make up the twenty-two as was reckoned above. 8. Some add Ruth and Cinoth, which in Latin is the Lamen- tations (Lamentatio) of Jeremiah, to the Sacred Writ- ings, and make twenty-four books of the Old Testa- ment, corresponding to the twenty-four Elders who stand present before the face of God (Apocalypse 4:4, etc.).
9. We also have a fourth class: those books of the Old Testament that are not in the Hebrew canon. Of these the first is the Book of Wisdom, the second Ecclesiasticus; the third Tobit; the fourth Judith; the fifth and sixth, the books of Maccabees. The Jews hold these separate among the apocrypha (apocrypha), but the Church of Christ honors and proclaims them among the divine books.
10. In the New Testament there are two classes: first the Gospel (evangelicus) class, which contains Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, and second the Apostolic (apos- tolicus) class which contains Paul in fourteen epistles, Peter in two, John in three, James and Jude in single epistles, the Acts of the Apostles and the Apocalypse (i.e. Revelation) of John. 11. The entire content of both Testaments is characterized in one of three ways, that is, as narrative (historia), moral instruction (mores), or allegorical meaning (allegoria). These three are further divided in many ways: that is, what is done or said by God, by angels, or by humans; what is proclaimed by the prophets about Christ and his body [that is, the Church], about the devil and his members, about the old and the new people, about the present age and the future king- dom and judgment.
ii. The writers and names of the Sacred Books (De scriptoribus et vocabulis sanctorum librorum)
1. According to Hebrew tradition the following are accepted as authors of the Old Testament. First Moses produced the cosmography (cosmographia) of the divine story in the five scrolls that are called the Pentateuch. 2. The Pentateuch is so called from its five scrolls, for psvt? is "five" in Greek, and t?uyoç is "scroll." 3. The book of Genesis is so called because the beginning of the world and the begetting (generatio) of living creatures are con- tained in it. 4. Exodus recounts the exit (exitus) or egress of the people Israel from Egypt, whence it takes its name.
5. Leviticus is so named because it describes the services and the variety of sacrificial rites of the Levites, and in it the whole Levitical order is commented on.
6. The book of Numbers is so called because in it the tribes of the exodus from Egypt are enumerated (dinu- merare), and the description of the forty-two journey- stages in the wilderness is contained in it (Numbers 33:1- 49). 7. Deuteronomy is named with a Greek term (cf. 6?át?poç, "second"; voµóç, "law") which in Latin means "second law" (secunda lex), that is, a repetition and a prefiguration of the Gospel law; the Gospel contains the earlier matters in such a way that all things that are repli- cated in it are nevertheless new. 8. The book of Joshua takes its name from Jesus son of Nave, whose story it contains - in fact the Hebrews claim that its writer was this same Joshua. In this text, after the crossing of the Jor- dan the kingdoms of the enemy are destroyed, the land is divided for the people, and the spiritual kingdoms of the Church and the Heavenly Jerusalem are prefigured through the individual cities, hamlets, mountains, and borders.
9. Judges is named from those leaders of the people who presided over Israel after Moses and Joshua and before David and the other kings were alive. Samuel is believed to have produced this book. The book of Samuel describes the birth, priesthood, and deeds of this same Samuel, and therefore takes its name from him.
10. Although this book contains the story of Saul and David, both are still connected to Samuel, because he anointed Saul into his kingship, and he anointed David as the future king. Samuel wrote the first part of this book, and David wrote the sequel, up to its conclusion.
11. Likewise the book of Malachim is so called because it recounts in chronological order the kings of Judah and the nation of Israel along with their deeds, for Malachim
is a Hebrew word that means 'Kings' (Reges) in Latin. Jeremiah first gathered this book into one volume, for earlier it was dispersed as the narratives of the individ- ual kings. 12. Paralipomenon (i.e. Chronicles) is named with a Greek word; we can call it the book 'of omissions' or 'of leftovers' (cf. papa2?(c)p?tv, ppl. papa2tpóµ?voç, "pass over"), because what was omitted or not fully told in the Law or the books of Kings is recounted there in brief summary.
13. Some say Moses wrote the book of Job, others say one of the prophets, and some even consider that Job himself, after the calamity he suffered, was the writer, thinking that the man who underwent the struggles of spiritual combat might himself narrate the victories he procured. 14. The beginning and end of the book of Job in Hebrew is composed in prose, but the middle of it, from the place where he says (3:3), "Let the day perish wherein I was born" up to (42:6), "Therefore I reprehend myself, and do penance" all runs in heroic meter.
15. The book of Psalms is called in Greek the Psalter (Psalterium), in Hebrew Nabla, and in Latin Organum. It is called the book of Psalms because one prophet would sing to a psaltery-lute and the chorus would respond in the same tone. Moreover the Hebrew title heading the psalms is this: Sepher Thehilim, which means "scroll of hymns." 16. The authors of the psalms are those whose names are given in the titles, namely Moses, David, Solomon, Asaph, Ethan, Idithun, the sons of Core, Eman, Ezraitha and the rest, whom Ezra gath- ered into the one scroll. 17. Furthermore, all the psalms of the Hebrews are known to have been composed in lyric meter; in the manner of the Roman Horace and the Greek Pindar they run now on iambic foot, now they resound in Alcaic, now they glitter in Sapphic measure, proceeding on trimeter or tetrameter feet.
18. David's son Solomon, king of Israel, produced three scrolls in accordance with the number of his names (see VII.vi.65). The first of these is Masloth, which the Greeks call Parabolae, and the Latins call Proverbs (Proverbia), because in it he displayed figures of words (verbum) and images of the truth (veritas) by way of anal- ogy. 19. Moreover he reserved the truth for his readers to interpret. He called the second book Coheleth, which in Greek means Ecclesiastes, in Latin 'The Preacher' (Con- tionator), because his speech is not directed specifically to one person, as in Proverbs, but generally to everyone, teaching that all the things that we see in the world are
fleeting and brief, and for this reason are very little to be desired. 20. He designated the third book Sir has- sirim, which is translated in Latin as the song of songs; there he sings mystically, in the form of a wedding song, of the union of Christ and the Church. It is called the song of songs because it is preferred before all other songs contained in the Sacred Scriptures, just as certain things in the Law are called 'holy,' whose superiors are called the 'holy of holies.' 21. The poems in these three books are said to be composed, in their own language, in hexameters and pentameters, as Josephus and Jerome write.
22. Isaiah, an evangelist more than a prophet, pro- duced his own book, whose whole text advances in an elegant style. Its poetryruns alonginhexameterandpen- tameter verse. 23. Jeremiah likewise published his own book together with its dirges (threnus), which we call Lamentations (Lamenta), because they are employed in times of sadness and funerals. Among them he com- posed four 'acrostic poems' (alphabetum) in varied meter. The first two of these were written in a quasi- Sapphic meter, because the three short verses that are joined to each other and begin with only one letter conclude with a heroic period. 24. The third alphabet- poem was written in trimeters, and each tercet's verses begin with a repeated triad of initial letters. The fourth alphabet-poem is said to be like the first and second.
25. Ezekiel and Daniel are held to have been written by certain wise men. Of these, Ezekiel has its opening and close wrapped up in much obscurity, whereas with clear speech Daniel proclaims the kingdoms of the world and designates the time of Christ's advent in a thoroughly open pronouncement. 26. These are the four prophets who are called Major Prophets, because they produced long scrolls.
Each book of the twelve prophets is entitled with the name of its own author. They are called the Minor Prophets because their discourses are short. 27. Hence they are joined together and contained in one scroll. Their names are Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi.
28. The book of Ezra is entitled after its own author; in its text are contained the words of Ezra himself and of Nehemiah as well. Let it not disturb anyone that we speak about a single book of Ezra, because the second, third, and fourth are not accepted among the Hebrews, but are counted among the apocrypha. 29. Ezra is thought to have written the book of Esther, in which that queen is described as having snatched her people, as a figure of the Church of God, from slavery and death. Because Aman, who signifies wickedness, was killed, the celebra- tion of that day (i.e. Purim) has been passed down to posterity.
30. The book of Wisdom (Sapientia) never existed in Hebrew, whence even its title is more redolent of Greek eloquence. The Jews say this book is by Philo,3 and it is appropriately named Wisdom because in it the advent of Christ, who is the Wisdom of the Father, and his passion are clearly expressed. 31. Jesus the son of Sir- ach, of Jerusalem, grandson of the high priest Jesus, of whom Zechariah makes mention (Zechariah 3:1, etc.), most surely composed the book Ecclesiasticus. Among Latin speakers this book is designated with the super- scription of Solomon, because of the similarity of its style. 32. It is called Ecclesiasticus because, with great care and orderliness, it has been published about the teaching of the religious way of life of the whole Church (Ecclesia). This book is found among Hebrew speakers, but is regarded as belonging to the apocrypha. 33. By what authors the books of Judith, Tobit, or Maccabees were written has not been established at all. They take their titles from the names of those whose deeds they inscribe.
34. The four Evangelists (Evangelista) wrote severally the four Gospels (Evangelium). 35. First Matthew wrote his Gospel in Hebrew characters and words in Judea, tak- ing as his starting point for spreading the gospel (evan- gelizare) the human birth of Christ, saying (1:1): "The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham" - meaning that Christ descended bodily from the seed of the patriarchs, as was foretold in the prophets through the Holy Spirit. 36. Second, Mark, in Italy, filled with the Holy Spirit, wrote in Greek the Gospel of Christ, having followed Peter as a disciple. He began his Gospel with a prophetic spirit, saying (1:3, quoting the prophet Isaiah 40:3): "A voice of one crying in the desert: Prepare ye the way of the Lord" - so that he might show that after his assumption of flesh Christ
preached the Gospel in the world. Now Christ also has been called a prophet, as is written (Jer. 1:5): "I made thee a prophet unto the nations."
37. Third, Luke, most polished in his Greek of all the evangelists, in fact wrote his Gospel in Greece, where he was a physician. He wrote it to Bishop Theophilus, begin- ning with a priestly spirit, saying (1:5): "There was in the days of Herod, the king of Judea, a priest, Zechariah" - so that he might show that Christ after his birth in the flesh and his preaching of the Gospel was made a sacrificial victim for the salvation of the world. 38. For Christ himself is the priest of whom it is said in Psalms (109:4): "Thou art a priest forever according to the order of Melchizedech." When Christ came, the priesthood of the Jews grew silent, and their law and prophecy ceased.
39. Fourth, John wrote the last Gospel in Asia, beginning with the Word, so that he might show that the same Sav- ior who deigned to be born and to suffer for our sake was himself the Word of God before the world was, the same who came down from heaven, and after his death went back again to heaven.
40. These are the four Evangelists, whom the Holy Spirit symbolized through Ezechiel (1:10) as four ani- mals. The animals are four because, by their preach- ing, the faith of the Christian religion has been dissemi- nated through the four corners of the earth. 41. They are moreover called animals (animalia) because the Gospel of Christ is preached for the sake of the soul (anima) of a person. And they are full of eyes inside and out- side, because they foresee the Gospels which have been spoken by the prophets, and which he promised in for- mer times. 42. Further, their legs are straight, because there is nothing crooked in the Gospels. Their wings are sixfold, covering their legs and faces, because things that were hidden until the coming of Christ have been revealed. 43. Moreover, 'Gospel' (evangelium) means "good news" (bona adnuntiatio), for in Greek ?u means 'good,' ?yy?2(c)a means 'news.' Hence 'angel' (angelus) means "messenger."
44. Paul the Apostle wrote fourteen epistles of his own. He wrote nine of them to seven churches, and the rest to his disciples Timothy, Titus, and Philemon. 45. Most Latin speakers are doubtful whether the Epistle to the Hebrews is by Paul, because of the dissonance of its style, and some suspect that Barnabas collaborated in its writ- ing, and others that it was written by Clement. 46. Peter wrote the two epistles under his name, which are called
the Catholic (i.e. 'universal') Epistles because they were written not to one people or city only, but generally to every nation. 47. James and John and Jude wrote their own epistles.
48. The Acts of the Apostles sets down the beginnings of the Christian faith among the gentiles and the story of the nascent Church. Luke the Evangelist is the writer of the Acts of the Apostles; in this work the infancy of the young Church is woven, and the history of the apostles is contained - whence it is called the Acts of the Apostles.
49. John the Evangelist wrote the Apocalypse during the period when, exiled for his preaching of the Gospel, he was sent to the isle of Patmos. Apocalypsis is translated from Greek into Latin as 'revelation' (revelatio), and a revelation means a manifestation of things that were hidden, as John himself says (Apoc. 1:1): "The Revelation (Apocalypsis) of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to make known to his servants."
50. These are the writers of the sacred books who, speaking through the Holy Spirit, for our education drew up in writing both precepts for living and the pattern for belief. 51. The other volumes aside from these are called apocrypha. They are called the apocrypha, that is, the secret things (cf. ?pómpU??oç, "hidden"), because they have come into doubt; their origin is hidden and is not evident to the Church Fathers, from whom the authority of the true scriptures has come down to us by a very sure and well-known succession. 52. Although some truth is found in the apocrypha, nevertheless because of their many falsities there is no canonical authority in them. These are rightly judged by the wise as not to be regarded as the works of those to whom they are ascribed. 53. Indeed, many works are produced by heretics under the names of prophets, and more recently under the names of apostles, all of which have, as a result of diligent exam- ination, been set apart by canonical authority under the name of apocrypha.
iii. Libraries (De bibliothecis) 1.A library (bibliotheca) takes its name from Greek, because books are deposited there, for ßtß2(c)Yv means "of books" (liber) and 9?m? means "repository." 2. After the Law (i.e. Torah) was burned by the Chaldeans, the scribe Ezra, inspired with the divine spirit, restored the library of the Old Testa- ment when the Jews had returned to Jerusalem, and he corrected all the scrolls of the Law and Prophets, which had been corrupted by the gentiles, and he ordered
the whole Old Testament into twenty-two books, so that there might be as many books in the Law (i.e. the Old Testament) as they had letters of the alphabet. 3. Among the Greeks, however, the Athenian tyrant Pisi- stratus is thought to have been the first to establish a library. Afterwards, when Athens was burned, Xerxes brought this library, which had been augmented by the Athenians, to Persia; after a long time Seleucus Nicanor brought it back to Greece. 4. Hence arose, in kings and in other cities, a desire to procure the scrolls of diverse nations and to render them into Greek by translators.
5. Thus Alexander the Great and his successors set their minds to building libraries with every book. Ptolemy in particular, known as Philadelphus, and very percep- tive about all kinds of literature, collected for his library not only pagan authors, but even divine literature, because he emulated Pisistratus in his zeal for libraries. In his time seventy thousand books could be found in Alexandria.
iv. Translators (De interpretibus) 1. This Ptolemy, moreover, seeking from the pontifex Eleazar the writ- ings of the Old Testament, was responsible for the translation from Hebrew into Greek, by seventy schol- ars of those writings that he held in the Alexandrian library. 2. Although they were separated, each apart in his own chamber, through the Holy Spirit they trans- lated everything in such a way that nothing was found in the manuscript of any of them that was different from the rest, even in the order of words. 3. There were also other translators who translated the sacred writ- ings from Hebrew into Greek, such as Aquila, Sym- machus, and Theodotion, and also that common (vul- garis) translation (i.e. the early Latin translation called Itala or Vetus Latina), whose authorship is not evident - for this reason the work is designated the Fifth Edi- tion (Quinta Editio) without the name of the transla- tor. 4. Furthermore, Origen provided a sixth and sev- enth edition with amazing diligence, and compared them with the other editions. 5. Also the priest Jerome, skilled in three languages, translated the same Scriptures from Hebrew into Latin speech, and rendered them elo- quently. His translation (i.e. the Vulgate) is deservedly preferred over the others, for it is closer in its word- ing, and brighter in the clarity of its thought, [and, inasmuch as it is by a Christian, the translation is truer].
v. 
The one who first brought books to Rome (De eo qui primum Romam libros advexit) 1. Aemilius Paulus first brought a good supply of books to Rome after he had conquered Perses, king of Macedonia; then Lucullus, from the Pontic spoils. After these, Caesar gave to Marcus Varro the task of constructing the largest library possible.
2. Pollio first made libraries, Greek as well as Latin, for public use at Rome, with statues of the authors added in an atrium that he had built most magnificently from spoils.
vi. Those who established libraries among us Chris- tians (Qui apud nos bibliothecas instituerunt) 1. Among us the martyr Pamphilus, whose life Eusebius of Caesarea wrote, first strove to equal Pisistratus in his zeal for a sacred library. He had about thirty thou- sand volumes in his library. 2. Also Jerome and Genna- dius, searching systematically through the whole world, hunted down ecclesiastical writers, and they enumerated their works in a one-volume catalogue.
vii. Those who have written many things (Qui multa scripserunt) 1. Among Latin speakers, Marcus Teren- tius Varro wrote innumerable books. Among the Greeks likewise Chalcenterus (i.e. Didymus) is exalted with great praise because he published so many books that any of us would be hard put merely to copy out in our own hand such a number of works by another.
2. From us (i.e. Christians) also Origen, among the Greeks, in his labor with the Scriptures has surpassed both Greeks and Latins by the number of his works. In fact Jerome says that he has read six thousand of his books. 3. Still, Augustine with his intelligence and learning overcomes the output of all these, for he wrote so much that not only could no one, working by day and night, copy his books, but no one could even read them.
viii. The types of literary works (De generibus opus- culorum) 1. There are three genres of 'literary works' (opusculum). The first kind are extracts (excerptum), which in Greek are called scholia, in which things that seem obscure or difficult are outlined in brief sum- mary. 2. The second kind are homilies (homilia), which Latin speakers call 'talks' (verbum), which are deliv- ered before the public. Third are tomes (tomus), which we call books or volumes. Homilies are spoken to the
common people, but tomes, that is, books, are longer discourses.
A dialogue (dialogus) is a conversation of two or more people; Latin speakers call it a discussion. What the Greeks call dialogues we call discussions. 3. A discus- sion (sermo) is so called because it is interwoven (serere) between each of the two participants. Whence in Vergil (Aen. 6.160):
They interwove many things in varied discussion (sermo) between themselves.
A treatise is   4. One may distinguish a discussion,
a treatise (tractatus), and a talk (verbum): a discussion requires a second person, a treatise is specifically directed toward oneself, but a talk is directed toward everyone. Whence it is said, "He addressed a talk to the public."
5. Commentaries (commentarium) are so called as if the term were 'with the mind' (cum mente); they are inter- pretations, like comments on the law, comments on the Gospel. 6. An apology (apologeticum) is an excusing (excusatio), in which some people are wont to respond to their accusers. It is presented in defense or denial only; the term is Greek. 7. A panegyric (panegyricum) is an extravagant and immoderate form of discourse in praise of kings; in its composition people fawn on them with many lies. This wickedness had its origin among the Greeks, whose practised glibness in speaking has with its ease and incredible fluency stirred up many clouds of lies.
8. The books of festival-registers (fasti) are those in which kings or consuls are registered, so called from fasces (fasces), that is, from their power. Whence Ovid's books are called the Fasti, because they were pub- lished on the subject of kings and consuls. 9. A proem (prooemium) is the beginning of a discourse, for proems are the first parts of books, which are joined on before the presentation of the main matter in order to prepare the ears of the audience. Many, skilled in their Latinity, use the name 'proem' without translation, but among us the translated term has the name 'preface' (praefatio; cf. praefari, ppl. praefatus, "speak beforehand"), as it were a pre-speaking (praelocutio).
10. Commandments (praeceptum) are statements that teach what ought to be done or what ought not to be done. What ought to be done, as "love [the Lord] thy God" and "honor thy father and thy mother." What ought not to be done, as "thou shalt not com-
mit adultery," "thou shalt not steal." 11. Similarly the commandments of the pagans either enjoin or forbid. They order that something be done, as (Vergil, Geo. 1.299):
Naked plow, naked sow.
They forbid, as (Vergil, Geo. 2.299):
Do not sow the hazel among the vines, nor reach for the highest shoot.
12. Among the Hebrews Moses first wrote command- ments; among Latin speakers the soothsayer Marcius first devised commandments, among which is this (1): "Be the last to speak, the first to grow silent."
13. Parables (parabola) and enigmas (problema) indi- cate by their names that they need to be examined rather deeply. A parable in fact displays the likeness of some thing. Although it is a Greek term, it has been appropriated into Latin. It is known that in parables what are called likenesses of the things are compared with the things in question. 14. But enigmas, which are called posers (propositio) in Latin, are questions involv- ing a matter that must be resolved by disputation. 15. A question (quaestio) is an inquiry (quaesitio), when one inquires whether a thing exists, what it is, and what sort of thing it is. 16. An argument (argumentum) is so called as if it were sharp (argutus), or because it is keenly (argute) devised for verifying things. 17. Greeks speak appropriately of a 'letter' (epistola) - and it is trans- lated "missive" (missa) in Latin - for otó2a or otó2ot are 'things sent off ' (missa) or 'people sent off' (missi).
18. Before the use of papyrus sheets or parchment, the contents of letters were written on shingles hewn from wood, whence people called the bearers of these 'tablet- couriers' (tabellarius).
ix. Wax tablets (De ceris) 1. 'Wax tablets' (cera) are the stuff of letters, the nourishers of children; indeed (Dra- contius, Satisfactio 63),
They give intelligence to boys, the onset of sense.
The Greeks are reported as first to have passed down the use of wax tablets, for Greeks and Etruscans first wrote on wax tablets with an iron stylus. Afterwards the Romans commanded that no one should own an iron stylus (graphium ferreum). 2. Hence it was said
among scribes, "You shall not strike wax with iron." Afterwards it was established that they would write on wax tablets with bones, as Atta indicates in his Satura, saying (12):
Let us turn the plowshare and plow in the wax with a point of bone.
The Greek term graphium is scriptorium in Latin, for
ypa??? is "writing."
x. Papyrus sheets (De cartis) 1. Egypt first provided the use of papyrus sheets, initially in the city of Mem- phis. Memphis is the Egyptian city where the use of papyrus sheets was first discovered, as Lucan says (Civil War 4.136):
The sheet of Memphis is made from the bibulous papyrus.
He called papyrus bibulous (bibulus) because it drinks (bibere) liquid. 2. A 'papyrus sheet' (carta) is so called because the stripped rind of papyrus is glued together 'piece by piece' (carptim). There are several kinds of such sheets. First and foremost is the Royal Augustan, of rather large size, named in honor of Octavian Augus- tus. 3. Second, the Libyan, in honor of the province of Libya. Third the Hieratic, so called because it was selected for sacred books (cf. ¬?póç, "sacred") - like the Augustan, but tinted. 4. Fourth the Taeneotic, named for the place in Alexandria where it was made, which is so called. Fifth the Saitic, from the town of Sais. 5. Sixth the Cornelian, first produced by Cornelius Gallus, prefect of Egypt. Seventh the commercial, because merchan- dise is wrapped in this type, since it is less suitable for writing.
xi. Parchment (De pergamenis) 1. Because the kings of Pergamum lacked papyrus sheets, they first had the idea of using skins. From these the name 'parchment' (pergamena), passed on by their descendents, has been
preserved up to now. These are also called skins (mem- branum) because they are stripped from the mem- bers (membrum) of livestock. 2. They were made at first of a muddy color, that is, yellowish, but after- wards white parchment was invented at Rome. This appeared to be unsuitable, because it soils easily and harms the readers' eyesight - as the more experienced of architects would not think of putting gilt ceiling panels in libraries, or any paving stones other than of Carystean marble, because the glitter of gold wea- ries the eyes, and the green of the Carystean mar- ble refreshes them. 3. Likewise those who are learning money-changing put dark green cloths under the forms of the coins, and carvers of gems look repeatedly at the backs of scarab beetles, than which nothing is greener, and painters [do the same, in order that they may refresh the labor of their sight with the greenness of these scarabs].
4. Parchment comes in white or yellowish or purple. The white exists naturally. Yellowish parchment is of two colors, because one side of it is dyed, that is yellowed, by the manufacturer. With regard to this, Persius (Satires 3.10):
Now the book and the two-colored parchment with its hair scraped smooth. 
5. But purple parchment is stained with purple dye; on it melted gold and silver on the letters stands out. 
xii. Bookmaking (De libris conficiendis) 1. Among the pagans, certain categories of books were made in fixed sizes. Poems and epistles were in a smaller format, but histories were written in a larger size. They were made not only on papyrus sheets or on parchment, but also on the intestinal membranes of elephants or on the inter- woven leaves of mallows or palms. 2. Cinna mentions this type thus (fr. 11):
On Prusias's boat I have brought as a gift for you these poems through which we know the aerial fires, poems much studied over with Aratus's midnight lamps, written on the dry bark of smooth mallow. 
3. It first became usual to trim books in Sicily, for at first they were smoothed by pumice, whence Catullus says (1.1):
To whom am I giving my charming little book just now smoothed with dry pumice?
xiii. The terminology of books (De librorum vocabu- lis) 1.A codex is composed of many books;a book is of one scroll. It is called a codex (codex) by way of metaphor from the trunks (codex) of trees or vines, as if it were a wooden stock (caudex, i.e. an older form of the word codex), because it contains in itself a multitude of books, as it were of branches. 2.A scroll (volumen) is a book so called from rolling (volvere), as we speak of the scrolls of the Law and the scrolls of the Prophets among the Hebrews. 3. Liber is the inner membrane of bark, which clings to the wood. With regard to this, Vergil thus (cf. Ecl. 10.67):
The bark (liber) clings to the high elm.
Whence what we write on is calleda book (liber) because before the use of papyrus sheets or parchment, scrolls were made - that is, joined together - from the inner bark of trees. Whence those who write are called copyists (librarius) after the bark of trees.
xiv. Copyists and their tools (De librariis et eorum instrumentis) 1. Formerly they called copyists bibliopo- lae, for the Greeks call a book ß(c)ß2oç. Copyists are called by that name, and also 'antiquarians' (antiquarius), but copyists write both new and old things, antiquarians only old things, whence they have taken their name. 2. The scribe (scriba) got his name from writing (scribere), expressing his function by the character of his title. 3. The scribe's tools are the reed-pen and the quill, for by these the words are fixed onto the page. A reed-pen is from a tree; a quill is from a bird. The tip of a quill is split into two, while its unity is preserved in the integrity of its body, I believe for the sake of a mystery, in order that by the two tips may be signified the Old and New Testament, from which is pressed out the sacrament of the Word poured forth in the blood of the Passion. 4. The reed-pen (calamus) is so called because it places liquid, whence among sailors 'to place' is calare. 5. A quill (pinna) is so called from 'hanging' (pendere), that is, flying, for it comes, as we have said, from birds. 6. The leaves (folia, i.e. folium) of books are so called from their likeness to the leaves (folium) of trees, or because they are made of leather sacks (follis), that is, of the skins that are customarily stripped from slaughtered livestock. The sides of leaves are called pages (pagina) because they are bound (compingere, perfect tense compegi) to one another.
7. 
A verse (versus, also meaning "furrow") is com- monly so called because the ancients would write in the same way that land is plowed: they would first draw their stylus from left to right, and then 'turn back' (convertere) the verses on the line below, and then back again to the right - whence still today country people call furrows versus. 8. A slip (scheda) is a thing still being emended, and not yet redacted into books; its name is Greek, as is tomus (i.e. "piece of papyrus"). 
xv. Canon-tables of the Gospels (De canonibus Evan- geliorum) 1. Ammonius of Egypt first devised the canon-tables (canon) of the Gospels; following him, Eusebius of Caesarea drew them up more fully. These were made so that we can find out and know where one Gospel writer said things similar to the others, or where a passage was his alone. 2. These canon-tables are ten in number, of which the first contains the num- bers indicating passages where the four say the same things: Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. The second, where three: Matthew, Mark, Luke. The third, where three: Matthew, Luke, John. The fourth, where three: Matthew, Mark, John. 3. The fifth, where two: Matthew, Luke. The sixth, where two: Matthew, Mark. The sev- enth, where two: Matthew, John. The eighth, where two: Luke, Mark. The ninth, where two: Luke, John. 4. The tenth, in which individual evangelists say certain things of their own. 
The explanation of these things is this. Each passage of the Gospels has been assigned a number, and this num- ber is noted down beside the passage. Under each of these passage-numbers there is a certain table-number (aera) in red, indicating which canon table (i.e. of the ten canon-tables listed above) contains the passage-number under which this table-number has been placed. 5. For example, if the table-number is 1, then the passage- number is in the first canon-table (i.e. the table where parallel passages in all four Gospels are found); if it is 2,
then the passage-number is in the second canon-table; if 3, then it is in the third canon-table, and so on in order up to 10. 6. Therefore, if you have one of the Gospels open and want to know which of the evangelists say similar things, start with the passage-number lying alongside the text, and then look for that same passage-number in the canon table indicated by the table-number. There you will find how many evangelists said this passage, and which ones. So, precisely because they are indicated by their own numbers, you will find in the body of the text of each of the Gospels those places that you have looked for that have said the same things.
xvi. The canons of Councils (De canonibus Concil- iorum) 1. Canon (canon) is a Greek word; in Latin, 'measuring rod' (regula). A measuring rod is so called because it draws 'in a straight line' (recte), and never goes astray. Some say a measuring rod is so called because it rules (regere), or because it offers a norm of living cor- rectly (recte), or because it corrects (corrigere) anything distorted or wicked. 2. The canons of general councils began in the time of Constantine, for in earlier years, with persecution raging, there was little opportunity for teaching the common people. 3. For this reason Chris- tianity was rent with diverse heresies, because there was no freedom [for bishops] to assemble as a unity until the time of the aforementioned emperor - for he gave Christians the power to congregate freely. 4. Under Con- stantine the holy Fathers, gathering from all the world in the Nicene Council, promulgated in accordance with evangelic and apostolic faith the second (Nicene) Creed, following after the Apostles' Creed.
5. Of the councils of the church the venerable syn- ods which were foremost in encompassing the whole faith are four, like the four Gospels, or the four rivers of Paradise. 6. The first of these, the Nicene synod of 318 bishops, took place while Constantine Augustus was emperor. In it was condemned the blasphemy of the Arian treachery about the inequality of the holy Trinity, championed by that same Arius. This holy synod estab- lished through its creed that God the Son is consubstan- tial with God the Father. 7. The second synod, of 150 Fathers, was gathered at Constantinople under the elder Theodosius. Condemning Macedonius, who denied that the Holy Spirit was God, it showed that the Holy Spirit is consubstantial with the Father and the Son, render- ing the form of the creed that the whole [confession] of
Latin and Greek speakers proclaim in churches. 8. The third, the first Ephesian synod, of 200 bishops, was held under Theodosius Augustus the younger. It condemned with a just charge of anathema Nestorius, who claimed that there were two persons in Christ; it showed that in two natures abides the one person of [our] Lord Jesus Christ.
9. The fourth, the synod of Chalcedon, of 630 priests, was held under the emperor Marcian. In this synod a single judgment of the Fathers condemned Eutyches, an abbot of Constantinople, who preached that there was one nature both of the Word of God and of his flesh, and his defender Dioscorus, formerly bishop of Alexandria, and again Nestorius with the other heretics. This same synod preached that Christ the Lord was born of the Virgin, and consequently we acknowledge that in Christ is the substance of both divine and human nature. 10. These are the four principal synods, most abundantly preaching the doctrine of our faith; and any other councils that the holy Fathers, filled with the spirit of God, sanctified endure in all their vigor supported by the authority of these four, whose accomplishments are recorded in this work.
11. 'Synod' (synodus), from the Greek, is translated "company" or "assembly." 12. Theterm'council' isdrawn from Roman custom, for when issues were under dis- cussion everyone would gather together and deliberate with common vigilance. Whence 'council' (concilium) takes its name from common (communis) vigilance, as if it were comcilium, for the Latin cilia (i.e. "eyelids") pertain to eyes. Whence a 'court of justice' (considium) is a council, with the letter d changing to l. 13. An assem- bly (coetus) is a gathering (conventus) or congregation, from the verb gather (coire, ppl. coitus) that is, 'coming together' (convenire) in one. From this a convent (con- ventum, i.e. a monastic convent, usually conventus) is named, just as a conventus is a gathering, an assembly, from the association of many in one.
xvii. The Easter cycle (De cyclo Paschali) 1. Hippoly- tus, bishop in the times of the emperor Alexander, first wrote out the Easter cycle. After him those most esteemed authorities Eusebius of Caesarea, Theophilus of Alexandria, together with Prosper of Aquitaine and Victorius, with their extended reckonings of that same feast, promulgated many cycles. 2. The most blessed Cyril, bishop of Alexandria, calculating the reckoning
of Easter Day over ninety-five years as a result of five nineteens, indicated with the greatest brevity at what point in the calendar or at what day of the lunar cycle the Easter feast should be celebrated. 3. It is calleda cycle (cyclum) because it is set out in the form of a wheel, and arranged as if it were in a circle (circulum) it comprises the order of the years without variation and without any artifice. 4. Whence it happened that poems on any sub- ject made with a single verse-form may be called cyclic. It is called a table (laterculum, lit. "brickwork") because it lays out the order of the years in rows. 
5. The first cycle of nineteen:
Of the moon
B.
C. ii Ides
April xx
C. vi Kalends
April xvi
E. xvi Kalends
May xvii
C. vi Ides
April xx
B.
C. x Kalends
April xv
E. ii Ides
April xvi
C. ii Nones
April xix
E. viii Kalends
May xx
B.
C. v Ides
April xv
When this cycle is complete one returns to the begin- ning. [The years are computed from the creation of the world up to this most recent cycle.] 10. In ancient times the Church would celebrate the paschal season with the Jews on the fourteenth day of the moon, on whatever day of the week it fell. The holy Fathers prohibited this cele- bration at the Nicene synod, legislating that one should seek out not only the paschal moon and month, but also should observe the day of the Lord's resurrection; and because of this they extended the paschal season from the fourteenth day of the moon to the twenty-first day, so that Sunday would not be passed over. 
11. The term 'pasch' (pascha, i.e. Easter Day) is not Greek but Hebrew, and it derives not from 'suffering' - for p?oy?tv in Greek means "suffer" - but from the Hebrew word pasch, meaning "passover" (transitus), because at that time the people of God passed over (tran- sire, ppl. transitus) out of Egypt. Whence the Gospel (John 13:1) says, "Jesus knowing that his hour was come, that he should pass out (transire) of this world to the Father." 12. Easter Eve is held as a continuous vigil because of the coming of our king and God, so that the time of his resurrection might find us not sleeping but vigilant. The reason for this night's vigil is twofold: it is because on that night he then received life, although
he suffered death, or because at the same hour at which he was resurrected he will afterwards come for the Judg- ment. 13. Moreover we celebrate Easter Day in that man- ner not only to call to mind the death and resurrection of Christ, but also to ponder the other things that are attested concerning him, with regard to the meaning of the sacraments. 14. This is for the sake of the beginning of a new life and for the sake of the new person whom we are commanded to put on, taking off the old, purging out "the old leaven" that we may be "a new dough . . . for Christ our pasch is sacrificed" (I Corinthians 5:7).
Therefore because of this newness of life the first month of the new things (i.e. the new crops; see Exo- dus 23:15 etc.) in the months of the year is mystically attributed to the paschal celebration. 15. Indeed, that Easter Day is celebrated on a day of the third week - that is on a day that falls from the fourteenth to the twenty- first - signifies that in the whole time of the world, which is accomplished in seven periods of days, this holy event has now opened up the third age. 16. For the first age is before the Mosaic law, the second under the law, and the third under grace; where the sacrament is now man- ifest, earlier it was hidden in prophetic enigma. It is also because of these three ages of the world that the resur- rection of the Lord is on the third day. 17. That we find Easter Day among the seven days from the fourteenth to the twenty-first of the new moon is because of that number seven, by which a meaning of wholeness is often figured. That number is even given to the Church itself because of its image of wholeness, whence the apostle John in the Apocalypse writes to seven churches. 18. But the Church, still set in that mortality of the flesh, because of its own mutability is designated by the name of the moon in Scripture.
19. Different observance produces from time to time an error of opinions about the Easter feast day. The Latin
Church locates the moon of the first month (i.e. of the Roman calendar's year) from March 5 through April 3, and if the fifteenth day of the new moon should fall on a Sunday, Easter Day is moved forward to the next Sunday. 20. The Greek Church observes the moon of the first month from March 8 through April 5, and if the fifteenth day of the new moon should fall on a Sunday, they celebrate holy Easter then. Dissension of this kind between the two camps confuses the Easter liturgy.
21. A year that has only twelve lunar months, that is, 354 days, is called 'common.' It is called common (com- munis) because often two occur so 'connected together' (coniunctus) that they immediately follow one another in the (table for calculating the) Easter celebration - for an embolismic (i.e. intercalated) year always occurs alone.
22. An embolismic (embolismus) year has thirteen lunar months, that is, 384 days. That year was prophetically revealed to the holy Moses; in an embolismic year those who lived long ago were ordered to celebrate the pasch in the second month. 23. Further 'embolism' is a Greek term that is translated 'further addition' (superaugmen- tum) in Latin because it fills out the count of days of the common years, in which eleven lunar days are observed to be missing. 24. Moreover, embolismic and common years are found in this way. If there have been 384 days from the fourteenth day of the new moon of one Easter Day to the fourteenth day of its successor, the year is embolismic; if 354, common.
25. The 'bissextus' is the day added every four years, for in each year it grows a quarter of a whole unit, but when it has completed a unit in the fourth year, the bissextile day is made. 26. It is called the bissextus because twice six (bis sexies) reckoned up makes a whole unit (i.e. of the twelve ounces in a Roman pound), which is one day - just as a quarter-unit (quadrans) is reckoned up by four times (quater) - because a bissextus is how far the sun goes beyond the course of the days in the year, [or because it is not able to be intercalated in its own year unless you compute 'twice the sixth' (bis sextus) day before the nones of March, that is, both with the first day as the sixth day before the nones of March and, with the bissextus added, with the second day repeated as the sixth day before the nones of March]. 27. Further, from the sixth day before the nones of March through the day before the Kalends of January the bissextus is taken into account in the course of the moon, and afterwards it is removed.
28. Intercalary (intercalaris) days are so called because they are interposed (interponere) so that the reckoning of the sun and the moon may be reconciled, for calare means "pose," and intercalare means "interpose." 29. What Greeks call 'epacts' (epacta) the Latins call 'annual lunar additions,' which run through a cycle from eleven to thirty days. The Egyptians add epacts to make the lunar measurement equal to the reckoning of the sun.
30. For the moon in its course is known to shine twenty- nine and a half days, so that there are 354 (i.e. 12 × 29.5) days in a lunar year; there remain in the course of a solar year eleven days, which the Egyptians add (adicere). 31. Hence they are called additions (adiectio). Without these epacts you would not find what point of the lunar cycle corresponds to a given year and month and day. Those epacts are always added on March 21, on the same day of
the moon that falls on that date. 32. There are nineteen years in the (Metonic) cycle, but when the epacts add up to twenty-nine, which is in the nineteenth year of the cycle, at that point you do not add eleven epacts to the twenty-nine in the following year, such that you would get ten after subtracting thirty, but you start again with eleven.
xviii. The other liturgical feasts (De reliquis festivi- tatibus) 1. A 'festal celebration' (festivitas) is so called from 'festal days' (festus dies), as if the word were fes- tiditas, because during those days only sacred activities are carried out. The contrary to these are court-days (fasti), on which the law 'speaks' (fari, ppl. fatus), that is, is pronounced. A 'solemn feast' (sollemnitas) is so called from its holy rites, a day adopted in such a way that for religious reasons it ought not to be changed. It is named from 'customary' (solitus), that is, firm and solid (solidus), [or because it is customarily (solere) per- formed in the church year]. 2. A celebration (celebri- tas) moreover is so called because during it earthly activity is not carried out, but only celestial (caelestis) activities.
3. Easter Day is the first of all the feasts; we have spo- ken of this term above. 4. Like Easter Day, Pentecost was a feast day among the Hebrews, because it was cele- brated five tens of days after Easter Day - whence it takes its name, for psvt? means "five" in Greek. On that day according to the Law the 'loaves of proposition' would be offered from the new crops (Exodus 25:30, etc.). 5. The jubilee year in the Old Testament adumbrated this, and
now in turn it prefigures eternal rest through its figure of redemption. 6. The Greek term 'Epiphany' (Epiphania) is 'appearance' (apparitio) [or 'manifestation'] in Latin, foronthat day, when the star led the way, Christ appeared to the Magi to be worshipped. This was a figure of the beginnings of gentile believers. 7. [Also] on Epiphany day were manifest the sacrament of the Lord's baptism and the water changed into wine, the first of the signs per- formed by the Lord. 8. There are, in fact, two epiphanies: the first, in which, when the angel announced it, the newborn Christ appeared to the Hebrew shepherds; the second, in which a star, by its guidance, caused Magi from the pagan peoples to come to worship at the cradle that was a manger.
9. Scenopegia is a feast day of the Hebrews, trans- lated from the Greek into Latin as 'Feast of Taberna- cles.' It is celebrated by Jews in memory of their sojourn, when they were living in tabernacles after they advanced out of Egypt, and from that, scenopegia, because om?v? in Greek means "tabernacle." This feast is celebrated among the Hebrews in the month of September. 10. The neomenia we call kalends (i.e. the first day of the month), but this is the Hebrew usage, because their months (men- sis) are computed according to the lunar course, and in Greek the moon is called µ?v?, hence neomenia, that is, the new moon. 11. Those kalends were solemn among the Hebrews on account of a legal statute, concerning which it is said in the Psalter (Psalm 80:4 Vulgate), "Blow up the trumpet on the first of the month, on the noted day of your solemnity." 
12. Encaenia is a new dedication of the Temple, for in Greek matvóç means "new." When something new is ded- icated, it is called an encaenia. Jews celebrated this feast of the dedication of the Temple in the month of October.
13. Palm Sunday is so called because on that day our Lord and Savior, as the prophet sang, is said to have sat on an ass's colt while heading for Jerusalem. Then a multitude of the common people walking before him with branches of palms shouted (John 12:13), "Hosanna, blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord, the king of Israel."
14. Further, common people call this day Capitilavium because [on that day] the custom then was for the heads (caput, plural capita) of infants who were to be anointed to be washed (lavare) so that in their observation of Lent they would not approach the anointing dirty. 15. More- over on this day the creed is taught to the catechumens, because of the adjoining celebration of Easter, so that
those who already are hastening to receive the grace of God may come to know the faith that they profess.
16. The Lord's Supper is so called because on that day the Savior celebrated the pasch with his disciples. This is still celebrated just as it has come down to us, and on that day the holy chrism is prepared, and the beginning of the New Testament and cessation of the Old is declared. 17. Sabbath, according to the meaning of its Hebrew name, is called 'rest' (requies) because when the creation of the world was finished, God rested on that day. 18. And indeed on that day the Lord rested in his tomb, in order that he might confirm the mystery of that rest, for, in a foreshadowing of future things, this day was mandated to be observed by the Jews. However, after Christ fulfilled the figure of the sabbath in his tomb, the observation of that day ceased.
19. From that point on Sunday is called the Lord's (Dominicus) day, because on that day the joy of the res- urrection of our Lord (Dominus) is celebrated. This day was authorized, not by Jews but by Christians, as the day of the resurrection of the Lord, and from that time it began to have its own liturgical celebration. 20. For the Jews, only the sabbath was passed down as a solemn day, because before that time there was the repose (requies) of the dead, but there was no resurrection for anyone who, rising from the dead, might not die. 21. But after the resurrection of the body of the Lord took place in such a way that he might go before, at the head of the Church, demonstrating what the body of the Church could hope for at the last, then Sunday, the Lord's day, that is the eighth day, which is also the first day, began to be celebrated.
xix. Offices (De officiis) 1. There are many kinds of offices, but the chief one is that service which is held for holy and divine matters. An office (officium) is so called from performing (efficere), as if it were efficium, with one letter in the word changed for the sake of euphony, or rather that each person should do those things that interfere (officere) with nobody but are of benefit to all.
2. The office of Vespers takes place at the beginning of night, and is named for the evening star Vesper, which
rises when night falls. 3. But the office of Matins occurs at the beginning of daylight, and is named after the star Lucifer, which rises when morning begins. By the token of these two times of day it is shown that God is to be praised always, day and night. 4. The mass (missa) occurs at the time in the eucharistic service of the sacrifice when the catechumens are sent (mittere, ppl. missus) outside, while the deacon calls out, "If any catechumen remains, let him go outside." And hence the term is missa, because those who are not yet known to be regenerate (i.e. the unbaptized) cannot be present at the sacraments of the altar.
5. A choir (chorus) is a multitude gathered for sacred rites, and it is called a choir because in the beginning they would stand around an altar in the shape of a crown (corona) and thus sing. Others say the word 'choir' is from the 'concord' (concordia) that exists in charity, because without charity it is impossible to sing responses harmoniously. 6. Further, when one person sings (canere), it is called a monodia in Greek, a sicinium in Latin; when two sing, it is called a bicinium; when many, a choir. A chorea is a trifling entertainment in song or the steps of a dancing band. 7. The term 'antiphon' (antiphona) translated from the Greek, means "recipro- cal voice," specifically when two choruses alternate in singing with their order interchanged, that is, from one to the other. The Greeks are said to have invented this kind of singing. 8. The Italians handed down responsory singing; they called these chants 'responsories' (respon- sorius) because when one breaks off the other responds (respondere). There is however this distinction between responsories and antiphons, that in a responsory one person says the verse, whereas in antiphons the choruses alternate in the verses.
9. A lesson (lectio) is so called because it is not sung, like a psalm or hymn, but only read (legere, ppl. lec- tus). In singing we look for tunefulness; in a lesson, only enunciation. 10.A canticle (canticum) is the voice of one singing (cantare) in joy. 11.A psalm (psalmus) is the name for what is sung to the psaltery (psalterium). History records that the prophet David played this instrument, in a great mystery. These two terms are used together in certain titles of psalms, with their order alternating
depending on the musical technique. 12. Thusa 'canticle of a psalm' occurs when what a musical instrument plays, the voice of the singer afterwards sounds, but a 'psalm of a canticle' when the art of the instrument being played imitates what the human voice sounds first. 'Psalm' is named from the instrument called a psaltery, whence the custom is for it not to be accompanied by any other kind of playing.
13. There are moreover three ranges in singing: first the
succentor, second the incentor, and third the accentor. 
14. Some would call diapsalma a Hebrew word, meaning "always"; that is, they assert that those words among which the diapsalm is inserted are unchanging. 15. But others consider it a Greek word, meaning "an interval in psalm-chanting"; as a psalm is what is psalm-chanted, so a diapsalm is the silence interposed in psalm-chanting - just as a synpsalma is a joining of voice in singing, so a diapsalm is a disjunction of vocal sounds, where a kind of rest set off from the continuation of sound is marked.
16. Hence thoughts probably should not be run together in singing at the point where a diapsalma is interposed, because it is placed there so that a change of thought or of speaker may be recognized.
17.A hymn (hymnus) is the song of those giving praise (laudare), whence it is translated from the Greek as "praise" (laus) in Latin, being a song of joy and praise. Properly, then, hymns contain praise of God. Therefore if it is praise, but not of God, it is not a hymn; if it is both praise and praise of God, but it is not sung, it is not a hymn. Therefore if it is both uttered in praise of God and sung, then it is a hymn. 18. Its contrary is a threnody (threnum), which is a song of grief and death.
19. Alleluia is an expression of two words, that is, 'God's praise,' and is Hebrew, for Ia is one of the ten names by which God is addressed among the Hebrews.
20. Amen means "truly" or "faithfully," and it too is Hebrew. It is not permitted for Greek, Latin, or barbarian speakers to translate these two words, alleluia and amen, wholly into their own language, or to pronounce them in any other language, for although they can be translated, the antiquity of their own language has been preserved in them from apostolic times because of their especially sacred authority. 21. For so holy are these words that even John in the Apocalypse tells that when the Spirit revealed it to him he saw and heard the voice of the heavenly host like the voice of many waters and mighty thunder, saying
amen and alleluia (Apoc. 19:4, 6). And because of this it is fitting for both words to be spoken on earth just as they resound in heaven.
22. Osanna (i.e. hosanna) cannot entirely be trans- lated into another language: osi means "save!"; anna is an interjection expressing the emotion of someone in a state of passionate beseeching. 23. In its entirety, more- over, the word is osianna, which we pronounce as osanna, with the middle vowel degraded and elided just as hap- pens in poetic lines when we scan them, for the initial vowel of a following word excludes the final vowel of the preceding word. In Hebrew it is spoken osanna, which means "save!" with its object understood as either 'thy people' or 'the whole world.'
24. The offertory (offertorium) gets its name for the following reason: a fertum (sacrificial cake) is the name of an oblation which is offered (offerre) and sacrificed at the altar by high priests, and from this the offertory is named, as if 'because of the fertum.' 25. An oblation is so called because it is offered (offerre, ppl. oblatus). 26. Properly speaking 'gifts' (donum) refer to divine things, whereas 'presents' (munus) are of humans. 27. For munus is a term used of the services poor people pay to the rich in place of presents (munus). So, a present is given to a human, a gift to God - whence in temples we speak of 'votive gifts' (donaria). Further, they are called presents (munus) because they are received or given with one's hands (manus). 28. There are two things that are offered: a gift or a sacrifice. 29. We call a gift whatever is made of gold or silver or any other valuable. 30. Buta sacrifice is a victim and whatever is burnt or placed on an altar. Further, everything that is given to God is either dedi- cated or consecrated. That which is dedicated (dedicare) is 'given with speaking' (dare, "give" and dicere, "speak"), whence it is so called. Therefore those who think a con- secration means a dedication are wrong. 31. An immo- lation (immolatio) is so called by the ancients because a victim would be slain when it was placed 'on the mass' (in mole) of the altar. Whence also the slaughtering is after the immolation. But now an 'immolation' of the bread and chalice is proper usage, but a libation (libatio) is an offering of the chalice only. 32. Hence is that saying (Ecclesiasticus 50:16), "He offered (libavit) of the blood of the grape." Similarly one of the secular poets (Vergil, Aen. 7.133) says,
Now offer your libation-bowls to Jove.
To make a libation (libare) therefore is properly to pour out, and its name is taken from a certain Liber (i.e. Bacchus), who in Greece discovered the use of grapevines.
33. Among the ancients the sacrifice made before they proceeded against the enemy (hostis) was called a hos- tia. 34. But after a victory (victoria), when the enemy were defeated (devincere, ppl. devictus), the sacrifices they would slaughter were 'victims' (victima). Victims are larger sacrifices than hostiae. Others think that a vic- tim is so called because it would fall dead when struck by a blow (ictus), or because it would be brought to the altar bound (vincio, ppl. vinctus). 35. A holocaust (holocaus- tum) is a sacrifice in which all that is offered is consumed by fire, for when the ancients would perform their great- est sacrifices, they would consume the whole sacrificial victim in the flame of the rites, and those were holo- causts, for o2oç in Greek means "whole," mauotç means "burning," and holocaust, "wholly burnt."
36. All those sacred rites that in Greek are called 'reli- gious revels' (orgia) are called 'ceremonies' (caerimo- nia) in Latin. Properly, however, it has been perceived by learned people that ceremonies were so called from 'doing without' (carere), as if the word were carimonia, because whatever things are offered in sacred rituals peo- ple do without for their own use. This term is used evenin sacred writings. 37. Others believe that ceremonies prop- erly belong among the observations of Jews - specifically, abstaining from certain foods in accordance with the Old Law - because those who are observant do without the things from which they abstain. 38. The sacrifice (sacri- ficium, i.e. of the mass) is so called as if it were a 'sacred deed' (sacrum factum), because by a mystic prayer it is consecrated in commemoration of the Lord's suffering for us, whence we call this sacrifice, at his command, the body and blood of Christ. Although it consists of the fruits of the earth, it is sanctified and made a sacrament with the Spirit of God invisibly working. The Greeks call the sacrament of this bread and chalice the 'Eucharist' (Eucharistia), which in Latin means 'good favor' (bona gratia) - and what is better than the blood and body of Christ?
39. A 'sacrament' takes place in a particular liturgi- cal rite when an action is performed in such a way that it is understood to signify something that ought to be received ina holy way. Sacraments, then, are baptism and unction, and the body and blood [of the Lord]. 40. These
things are called sacraments (sacramentum) for this rea- son, that under the covering of corporeal things the divine virtue very secretly brings about the saving power of those same sacraments - whence from their secret (secretus) or holy (sacer) power they are called sacra- ments. 41. Sacraments are fruitfully performed under the aegis of the Church because the Holy Spirit dwelling in the Church in a hidden way brings about the aforesaid effect of the sacraments. 42. Hence, although they may be dispensed through the Church of God by good or by bad ministers, nevertheless because the Holy Spirit mys- tically vivifies them - that Spirit that formerly in apos- tolic times would appear in visible works - these gifts are neither enlarged by the merits of good ministers nor diminished by the bad, for (I Corinthians 3:7), "neither he that planteth is any thing, nor he that watereth; but God that giveth the increase." For this reason in Greek a sacrament is called a 'mystery,' because it has a secret and recondite character.
43. The Greek term 'baptism' (baptismum, cf. ßap- ttoµóç), is the equivalent of the Latin tinctio ("dipping," "dyeing") because in it a person is changed by the spirit of grace into a better thing, and is made a far different thing than he was. 44. For we were filthy before with the ugliness of sins, but in that bathing we become beautiful in the whitening of the virtues, whence it is written in the Song of Songs (8:5, in an older version), "Who is this that cometh up whitened?" 45. The mystery of baptism is not completed unless one is named, accompanied by the naming of the Trinity, that is, of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, as the Lord said to the apostles (Matthew 28:19), "Go, teach ye all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit." 46. Thus, just as every statement is confirmed by three witnesses, so the threefold number of divine names confirms this sacrament. 47. This is the reason why baptism is enacted by water: the Lord desired that invisible thing to be granted through the congruent but definitely tangible and visible element over which in the beginning the Holy Spirit moved (Genesis 1:2). 48. For just as the outer body is washed by water, so the spirit also is purified by the Holy Spirit in a hidden way through the mystery of baptism. The baptismal water is made holy
in this way: 49. when God is invoked the Holy Spirit descends from heaven and, when the waters have been purified, sanctifies them from itself, and they receive the power of purgation, so that in them both flesh and soul, befouled by sins, may be cleansed.
50. The Greek term 'chrism' (chrisma) is 'unction' (unctio) in Latin. The word 'Christ' (Christus) is also derived from this word, and a person is sanctified after theapplicationofunction. 51. For just as remission of sins is granted in baptism, so the sanctification of the spirit is administered through unction. This sacrament derives from the ancient custom according to which people used to be anointed into the priesthood or the royal office, for which reason Aaron was anointed by Moses. 52. When this is done in the flesh, it benefits in the spirit, just as in the gift of baptism also there is a visible act, that we are submerged in water, but a spiritual effect, that we are cleansed of sins. 53. This is what that ointment signifies, which a sinful woman is written to have poured on the feet of Jesus (Luke 7:37-50), and which she who is said not to have been a sinner, is written to have poured on his head (Matthew 26:7-13, etc.).
54. The sacramental 'laying onof hands' (manusimpo- sitio) is done to bid the Holy Spirit come, invoked by means of a blessing, for at that time the Paraclete, after the bodies have been cleansed and blessed, willingly descends from the Father and as it were settles on the water of baptism, as if in recognition of its settling on its original seat - for it is read that in the beginning the Holy Spirit moved over the waters (Genesis 1.2). 
55. The Greek term 'exorcism' (exorcismus) is 'con- juration' (coniuratio) in Latin, or a 'speech of rebuke' directed against the devil, that he should depart, as in this passage in Zechariah (3:1-2): "And the Lord showed me Jesus the high priest standing before the angel of the Lord: and Satan stood on his right hand to be his adver- sary. And the Lord said to Satan: The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan: and the Lord that chose Jerusalem rebuke thee."
56. Exorcism is this, to rebuke and conjure against the devil, whence it should be understood that it is no crea- ture of God that is exorcized or breathed out in infants, but that devil, to whom all are subject who are born with sin - for he is the prince of sinners.
57. The word 'creed' (symbolum) from Greek means "sign" or "token of recognition," for the apostles, about to disperse for preaching the gospel among the nations, proposed the creed for themselves as a sign or guidepost
for preaching. 58. Moreover it contains the profession of the Trinity and the unity of the Church and the whole holy order of Christian teaching. This creed of our faith and hope is not written on papyrus sheets and with ink, but on the fleshly tablets of our hearts. 59. A 'prayer' (oratio) means a "petition" (petitio), for to pray (orare) is to beseech (petere), just as to 'pray successfully' (exorare) is to obtain (impetrare). Further, prayer has a proper place and time. Place, because not everywhere, since we are prohibited by Christ from prayer in public, except where opportunity grants it or necessity requires it. The apostles are not believed to have prayed against Jesus' command when they prayed and sang to God in prison in the hearing of their guards. 60. With regard to time it has truly been said (I Thessalonians 5:17), "Pray without ceasing," but this applies to individuals; in a religious community there is a service at certain hours to signal the divisions of the day - at the third hour, the sixth, and the ninth (i.e. Terce, Sext, and Nones) - and likewise the divisions of the night.
61. These hours of prayers are apportioned so that, if we should by chance be occupied, the specific time would draw our attention to the divine office. These times are found in Scripture. 62. First, the Holy Spirit was poured into the gathered disciples at the third hour (Acts 2:15). Peter, on the day in which he experienced the vision of communication in the vessel, had ascended in order to pray at the sixth hour (Acts 10:9-16). Likewise Peter with John went to the temple at the ninth hour when he healed the paralytic (Acts 3:1-8). 63. But we also read that Daniel observed these times in his prayer (Daniel 6:13), and in any case it is the teaching from the Israelites that we should pray not less than three times a day, for we are debtors of three - Father, Son, and Holy Spirit - not counting, of course, other prayers as well, which are due without any notice being given, at the onset of day or of night or of the watches of the night. But we are also not to consume food before we have interposed a prayer, 64. for refreshment of the spirit should come first, because heavenly things come before earthly. Moreover, he who wishes for his prayer to fly to God should make two wings for it, fasting and almsgiving, and it will ascend swiftly and be clearly heard.
65. Fasting (ieiunium) is parsimony of sustenance and abstinence from food, and its name is given to it from a certain portion of the intestines, always thin
and empty, which is commonly called the jejunum (ieiunum). Whence the name of fasting is believed to have derived, because by the starvation of the jejunum the intestines are empty and cleaned out. 66. Fasting is also called a station (statio, i.e. a "watch"). This watch takes its name from a military analogy, because no happy festivity occurring in a camp rescinds the watch-duty (statio) of soldiers. For happiness maintains discipline more readily, grief more carefully; whence soldiers, never unmindful of their sworn duty, keep their watches all the sooner. 67. Some however distinguish between fast- ing and a station, for fasting is abstinence on any day indifferently, not in accordance with a rule but follow- ing one's own will, whereas a station is an observance of predetermined days or seasons. 68. Of days, as the fast on Thursday and Saturday mandated by the Old Law. Concerning this station the man said in the Gospel (Luke 18:12), "I fast twice in a week," that is, on the fourth and sixth days of the week. 69. Of seasons also, which were established by legal and prophetic customs at fixed times, as the fast of the fourth, fifth, seventh, and tenth month (Zechariah 8:19); or, as in the Gospel (Matthew 9:15), the days for fasting on which the bridegroom has been taken away; or as the observance of Lent, which is observed in the whole world, according to the apostolic institution, leading up to the time of the Lord's Passion.
70. Some add a third type to these, which they call 'dry- eating' (xerophagia), that is, abstinence from moist food. It takes its name from this, because some make use of dry food.
71. Penitence (poenitentia) is so called as if it were puni- tentia, because by means of his own repenting (poenitere, i.e. paenitere) a person punishes (punire) the wrong he has done. Indeed, they who truly do penance do nothing other than not permit what they have done wrong to go unpunished. Indeed, he whose high and just judgment no scoffer evades is sparing in proportion as they do not spare themselves. 72. Further, perfect penitence is to weep for past sins and not allow future ones. This peni- tential weeping bears the likeness of a fountain, because if by chance, when the devil attacks, some sin creeps in, by the satisfaction of penitence it is washed away. 73. Sat- isfaction (satisfactio) moreover, is to shut out the causes and urgings of sins and not to repeat the sin further. 74. But reconciliation (reconciliatio) is what is granted after the completion of penitence, for as we are won over
(conciliare) to God when we are first converted from paganism, so we are reconciled (reconciliare) when after sinning we return by penitence.
75. The Greek term exomologesis means what in Latin is termed 'confession,' a term that has a double significa- tion. A confession can either be understood as of praise, as in "I will confess you to be the Lord, the Father of heaven and earth," or as when someone confesses his sins so that they will be forgiven by him whose mercy is unfailing. 76. Therefore we express and make use of this Greek term exomologesis for that act by which we confess (confiteri, ppl. confessus) our sin to the Lord - not indeed as if he were ignorant, for nothing is hid- den from his knowledge; but a confession (confessio) is an 'explicit acknowledgment' (professa cognitio) of a thing, namely of that which is unknown. 77. For sup- pose a person has thought it profitable and pleasant to commit rapine, adultery, or theft, but when he recog- nizes that these things are liable to eternal damnation, as these things are acknowledged (cognoscere, ppl. cogni- tus) he confesses his error. 78. Moreover a confession is an affirmation of the cessation of error; therefore there should be cessation of sin when there is confession. Fur- ther, confession precedes, and forgiveness follows. But the person is beyond forgiveness who knows his sin but
does not confess what is known to him. 79. And so exo- mologesis is the discipline of a person's prostrating and humiliating himself in dress and food, to lie in sackcloth and ashes, to smear his body with filth, to cast down his spirit in mourning, to transform with harsh treatment those things which are at fault.
80. Litanies (litania) are the Greek names for what are called 'rogations' in Latin. But between litanies and exomologesis is this distinction, that exomologesis is per- formed only for the confession of sins, whereas lita- nies are ordained for beseeching God and procuring his mercy in some case. 81. But nowadays either term designates one thing, and commonly there is no dis- tinction whether 'litanies' or exomologesis is spoken of. The term 'supplication' is now retained in a certain way from paganism. 82. Among the pagans the festi- val days were either 'customary' (legitimus) or 'specially decreed' (indictus, also meaning "criminally indicted"). And indictus because the poor of ancient Rome would make sacrifice from a confiscation, or indeed out of the goods of the condemned. Hence 'propitiatory offerings' (supplicium) that were made from the goods of people who had suffered punishments (supplicium) are called 'supplications' (supplicatio): thus holy things took their being from the belongings of the accursed.
