i. Livestock and beasts of burden (De pecoribus et iumentis) 1. Adam was the first to confer names on all the animals, assigning a name to each one at the moment of its creation, according to the position in nature that it holds. 2. The different nations have also given names to each of the animals in their own lan- guages - for Adam did not assign these names in the Latin or Greek language, or in any of the languages of foreign nations, but in that language which, before the Flood, was the language of all peoples, which is called Hebrew. 3. In Latin they are called animals (animal) or 'animate beings' (animans), because they are animated (animare) by life and moved by spirit. 4. Quadrupeds (quadrupes) are so called because they walk on four feet (quattuor pedes); while these may be similar to livestock, they are nevertheless not under human control - such as deer, antelopes, onagers, et cetera. But they are not beasts, such as lions, nor are they beasts of burden, which could assist the useful activities of humans.
5. We call any animal that lacks human language and form 'livestock' (pecus). However, strictly speaking, the term 'livestock' is usually applied to those animals that are either suitable for food, such as sheep and swine, or are suitable for use by humans, such as horses and oxen. 6. There is a distinction between the terms pec- ora (i.e. the plural of pecus, neuter) and pecudes (i.e. the plural of pecus, feminine), for the ancients commonly used to say pecora with the meaning "all animals," but pecudes were only those animals that are eaten, as if the word were pecuedes (cf. esse, 1st person edo, "eat"). But in general every animal is called pecus from the word 'pas- turing' (pascere). 7. 'Beasts of burden' (iumenta) derive their name from the fact that they assist (iuvare) our labor and burdens by their help in carrying or plow- ing, for the ox pulls the carriage and turns the hard- est clods of earth with the plowshare; the horse and ass carry burdens, and ease people's labor when they travel. Whence they are called beasts of burden because they assist humans, for these are animals of great strength. 8. They are also called a herd (armentum) either because
they are suited for arms (arma), that is, warfare, or because we use them when we are armed. Others under- stand herds to be oxen only, from 'plowing' (arare), as if the word were aramentum, [or because they are armed (armare) with horns]. There is a distinction between herds and flocks (grex), for 'herd' is used for horses and oxen, while 'flock' is used for goats and sheep.
9.A sheep (ovis) is a mild livestock animal, with wool, a defenseless body, and a peaceful temperament, and it is so called from sacrifice (oblatio), because at first the ancients offered not bulls, but sheep, in sacrifice. They call some of them bidens (lit. "two-toothed") - those with two of their eight teeth longer than the rest; most often the pagans used to sacrifice these. 10. The wether (vervex) is either named from 'force' (vis, gen. viris), because it is stronger than the other sheep, or because it is male (vir), that is, masculine; or because it has a worm (vermis) in its head - irritated by the itching of these worms they butt against each other and strike with great force when they fight. 11. The ram (aries) is either named after the word ïAp?ç, that is, after 'Mars' - whence we call the males in a flock 'males' (mas, gen. maris) - or because this animal was the first to be sacrificed on altars (ara, gen. aris) by pagans. So, the 'ram' because it was placed on the altar; whence also this (Sedulius, Paschal Poem 1.115):
The ram is offered at the altar.
12. Although the Greeks name the lamb (agnus) from
?yvóç ("holy") as if it were sacred, Latin speakers think that it has this name because it recognizes (agnoscere) its mother before other animals, to the extent that even if it has strayed within a large herd, it immediately recognizes the voice of its parent by its bleat.
13. The kid (haedus) is so called from eating (edere), for the young ones are very juicy and pleasing in flavor. Whence also ['eat' (edere) and] foodstuffs (edulia) are named. 14. The he-goat (hircus) is a lascivious animal, butting and always eager to mate; his eyes look side- ways on account of wantonness, whence he has taken his
name, for according to Suetonius (Prata, fr. 171), hirqui are the corners of the eyes. His nature is so ardent that his blood by itself dissolves adamantine stone, which can be overpowered by neither fire nor iron. Larger he-goats are called cinyphii from the river Cinyps in Libya, where they are born large. 15. Some people have said he-goats (caper) and she-goats (capra) are named from their crop- ping (carpere) of bushes, others because they 'hold to uneven places' (captare aspera). Some say it derives from the creaking (crepitus) of their legs, whence also they are often called crepae - these are the wild goats which the Greeks called 6opm?ç (properly in Greek, "deer") because they can see very keenly, that is, ò(U6?pmsot?pov ("rather sharp-sightedly"). They dwell in the high mountains, and even from a great distance they can still see anyone who is approaching. 16. And a wild goat is likewise a caprea (in classical Latin, a roe-deer), and an ibex (ibex), as if the word were avex, because they hold to the steep and lofty places as the birds (avis) do, and inhabit the heights, so that from these heights they are scarcely (vix) visible to human gaze. 17. Whence also the southern part of the world calls the birds that inhabit the floods of the Nile ibexes (ibex, i.e. ibis). These animals, as we have said, dwell in the highest crags, and if ever they espy dan- ger from beasts or humans, they throw themselves down from the highest peaks on their horns and lift themselves up unharmed.
18. Deer (cervus) are so called from the word mspata, that is, from their horns, for 'horn' is called mspaç in Greek. They are antagonistic to serpents; when they sense themselves burdened with infirmity, they draw the serpents from their caves with the breath from their nostrils, and having overcome the malignancy of the poison, the deer are restored to health by eating the ser- pents. They were the ones to discover the herb dittany (dictamnus), for after they have eaten it, they shake out any arrows that have stuck in them. 19. Moreover, they are fascinated by the whistling of reed pipes. They listen intently with ears pricked, but if their ears are lowered, they hear nothing. If ever they swim across great rivers or seas, they place their head on the haunches of the one in front of them, and with each one following the next, they feel no difficulty from the weight. 20. Trage- laphi were named by the Greeks; while they have the same appearance as deer, nevertheless they have shaggy flanks like he-goats, and hairy chins with long beards. They are found nowhere except around the river Phasis.
21. The 'young stag' (hinnulus) is the offspring of deer [socalled from'nodding' (innuere), because they conceal themselves at a nod from their mother]. 22. The young doe (dammula) is so called because she flees 'from one's hand' (de manu). She is a timid animal and unwarlike, concerning which Martial says (Epigrams 13.94):
The boar is feared for his tusk, horns defend the stag; what are we unwarlike does (damae) but prey?
23. The hare (lepus), as if the word were levipes ("swift foot"), because it runs swiftly. Whence in Greek it is called 2ayÛç, because of its swiftness, for it is a speedy animal and quite timid. 24. Rabbits (cuniculus), a type of field animal, are so called as if the word were caniculus, because they are seized or driven out of their holes by hunting packs of dogs (canis).
25. The sow (sus) is so called because she roots up (subigere) feeding grounds, that is, she searches for food by rooting the earth up. The boar (verres), because he has great strength (vis, plural vires). The pig (porcus) as if the name were 'unclean' (spurcus), for he gorges himself on filth, immerses himself in mud, and smears himself with slime. Horace (Epistles 1.2.26) says:
And the sow, a friend to mud.
Hence also 'uncleanness' (spurcitia) or 'illegitimate chil- dren' (spurius) are named. 26. The hairs of pigs are called bristles, and bristles (seta) are named from the sow (sus). From these we also name 'shoemakers' (sutor), because they sew (suere), that is, stitch together, leather with bris- tles. 27. The 'wild boar' (aper) is so named from its feroc- ity (feritas), with the letter f removed and a p substituted. Whence he is also named oáaypoç, that is "wild" (i.e. "wildboar") in Greek (cf. ?yptoç, "wild"), for everything that is wild and untamed, we call, with loose usage, 'of the country' (agrestis).
28. The bullock (iuvencus) is so called because it was first to assist (iuvare) the activity of humans in culti- vating the earth, or because a bullock always used to be sacrificed to Jupiter (Iuppiter, gen. Iovis) everywhere by the pagans - never a bull, for age was a consideration in the choice of sacrifice. 29. 'Bull' (taurus) is a Greek word, just as is 'ox' (bos). The Indian bulls are tawny and they are as swift as a bird; their hair is turned backward; with their flexibility they turn their head around as they wish; by the hardness of their skin they repel every dart in their fierce wildness. 30. The Greeks call the ox ßouç.
Latin speakers call them triones (i.e. "plowing oxen") thus because they 'tread' (terere) the earth, as if the word were teriones. Naevius (Tragedies 62) says:
This rustic driver of the triones.
The span of its hide from the chin to the forelegs is called the dewlap (palear), from the term 'skin' (pellis) itself, as if the word were pellear. This is a sign of good breeding in an ox. Oxen possess an extraordinary affection for their comrades, for one will seek the other with whom he has been accustomed to share the yoke, and with constant lowing show its devoted fondness if by chance the other is missing. 31. The cow (vacca) is so called as if the word were boacca. The noun has the same type of variation as 'lion' (leo) and 'lioness' (leaena), 'dragon' (draco) and 'dragoness' (dracaena). 32. Calves (vitulus) and heifers (vitula) are named from their greenness (viriditas), that is, their green (i.e. "vigorous") age, just as a maiden (virgo) is. A heifer, therefore, is small and has not yet produced young, for after she has been put to breed, she is called a iuvenca ora cow. 33. Buffaloes (bubalus) are so called by derivation, since they are similar to oxen (bos). They are so ungovernable that they do not tolerate a yoke on their necks due to their wildness. Africa produces these. 34. The aurochs (urus) is the wild ox of Germania, possessing such long horns that supports for royal tables are made from them due to their size. [They are called urus from the word opoç, that is, "mountain"].
35. The camel (camelus) takes its name from its char- acteristics, either because, when they are being loaded, they lie down so that they become shorter and low- for the Greeks say yaµa(c) (lit. "on the ground") for 'low' and 'short' - or because their backs are humped, for maµoUp means "curve" in Greek. Although some other regions produce camels, Arabia produces the most. They differ from each other in that the Arabian camels have two humps on their backs and those from the other regions have one hump. 36. The dromedary (dromeda) is a kind of camel, smaller in height but faster. From this it takes its name, for 'race' and 'speed' are called 6póµoç in Greek. It is accustomed to travel one hundred Roman miles or more in a single day. This animal ruminates, just like the ox and sheep and camel. 37. Rumination (ruminatio) is named from the rumen (ruma), the upper part of the
gullet through which the food that has been taken down is regurgitated by some animals.
38. The ass (asinus) and the 'small ass' (asellus, dim. of asinus) are so called from 'sitting' (sedere), as if the word were asedus. The ass took this name, which is better suited to horses, because before people captured horses, they began by domesticating (praesidere, lit. "sit on") the ass. Indeed, it is a slow animal and balks for no reason; it allowed itself to be domesticated as soon as mankind wished it. 39. The wild ass is called an onager (onager), for the Greeks call the ass ovoç, and ?yptoç is "wild." Africa possesses large untamed onagers wander- ing through the desert. Individual onagers lead herds of females. When male colts are born, the adult males become jealous and bite off their testicles, so that the wary mothers hide the male colts in concealed places.
40. Some asses are called 'Arcadian' because, large and tall, they were first imported from Arcadia. The smaller asellus is needed more in the field because it tolerates hard work and makes almost no objection to neglect.
41. Horses (equus) are so called because when they were yoked in a team of four they were balanced (aequare); those equal in size and alike in gait would be joined together. 42. The packhorse (caballus) was for- merly called a cabo, because when walking it hollows (concavare) the ground with the imprint of its hoof, a property that the other animals do not have. Whence also the 'charger' (sonipes) because it 'clatters with its feet' (pedibus sonare). 43. Horses havea great deal of live- liness, for they revel in open country; they scent out war; they are roused to battle by the sound of the trumpet; when incited by a voice they are challenged to race, griev- ing when they are defeated, and exultant when they are victorious. Some recognize the enemy in war and seek to bite the foe. Some also respond to their own masters, and lose their tameness if their ownership changes. Some will allow no one on their back except their master; many of them shed tears when their master dies or is killed, for only the horse weeps and feels grief over humans. Whence [also] in the Centaur the nature of horses and of humans is combined. 44. People who are about to engage in battle are accustomed to deduce what the out- come will be from the dejection or the eagerness of the horses.
Persian, Hunnish, Epirian, and Sicilian horses have a long life span, exceeding fifty years, while the com- mon opinion is that Spanish, Numidian, and Galician
horses have a shorter life span. 45. In well-bred horses, so the ancients said, four things were considered: form, beauty, quality, and color. Form, that the body should be strong and solid, the height appropriate to the strength, the flank long, very lean, with well-rounded haunches, broad in the chest, the entire body knotted with dense musculature, the foot firm and solid with a concave hoof. 46. Beauty, that the head should be small and firm, the skin clinging close to the bones, the ears short and expressive, the eyes large, the nostrils flaring out, the neck upright, the mane and tail thick, the hooves of a firm roundness and solidity. 47. Quality, that it should be daring in spirit, swift of foot, with quivering limbs, which is a sign of strength, and easily roused from the deepest repose and controlled without difficulty when urged to speed. Indeed, the alertness of a horse is made known by its ears, and its valor by its quivering limbs.
48. These colors in particular should be noted: chest- nut, golden, ruddy, myrtle-colored, fawn, pale yel- low, bright gray, piebald, gray-white, shining-white, flat white, spotted, and black. But in the following list 'var- iegated' (varius) as a mixture of black and chestnut is a special case, but other variegations and ash-color are the least good. 49. The ancients used to call a chestnut (badium) horse vadium, because it runs (vadere) more strongly than the other animals. This is also date-brown, which people call 'scarlet.' And it is called date-brown (spadix) from the color of the date, which Sicilians call spadix. 50. Buta 'bright gray' (glaucus) horse is as if col- ored like blue-grey eyes, perfused with a kind of luster, for the ancients would call this 'bright gray.' Dun (gilvus) is the color of quinces, somewhat whitish. Piebald (gut- tatus) is white with intervening black spots. 51. 'Shining white' (candidus) and 'flat white' (albus) are different from each other, for 'flat white' has a kind of pallor, but 'shining white' is snowy and drenched with pure light. Grey-white (canus) is so called because it is composed of the colors white and black. Spotted (scutulatus) horses are so called because they have round markings, white on maroon. 52. A 'variegated' (varius) horse, because it has bands (via) of unlike colors. Horses whose feet alone are white are called petilus; the ones with a white forehead are called calidus. 53.A fawn-colored (cervinus) horse is what is popularly called guaranen. The common people call this 'bronzish' (aeranis), because it resembles bronze (aes, gen. aeris) in color. A myrtle-colored (mir- teus) horse is a subdued maroon. 54. The dosinus horse is
so called because its color is that of an ass (de asinus); it is also known as ash-colored (cinereus). These originate from wild stock, which we call equiferus, and therefore they cannot be used as city horses. 55. The mauros is black, for the Greeks call 'black' µaupoç.
The cob (mannus) is a smaller horse, which is com- monly called brunicus. The ancients named the veredus so because it 'conveys carriages' (vehere redas), that is, it pulls them, or because it travels on public roads (via), by which carriages (reda) were also accustomed to go.
56. There are three kinds of horses: one well-bred, suited for battles and riders; the second common and ordinary, suited for draft work, not for riding; the third originating from a mixture of different species, which is called hybrid (bigener), because it is born from different species, like the mule. 57. The mule (mulus) has a name derived from Greek - for it is this in Greek - or because, forced by the miller's yoke,
It draws the slow millstone (mola) around in grinding (molere). 
The Jews claim that Ana, Esau's great-grandson, was the first to have herds of mares mounted by asses in the desert, so that new animals, mules, might be conceived contrary to nature. They also say that onagers were set to mount she-asses for this purpose, and this type of breeding was invented so that very speedy asses would be born from these unions.
58. Indeed human intervention has forced animals of different species to breed with each other, and has thus developed another type of animal by means of an unnat- ural combination. In this way Jacob obtained similarities of colors contrary to nature, for his sheep conceived off- spring similar to the image of the ram mounting them from above that they saw as a reflection in the water (cf. Gen. 30:32-42). 59. And then this same thing is reported to have occurred inherds of mares, so that people present well-bred stallions to the view of the mares as they con- ceive, to enable them to conceive and create offspring resembling these stallions. Dove fanciers also place pic- tures of the most beautiful doves in those places where the doves are mated, so that, catching sight of the picture, they may produce offspring similar in appearance. 60. Whence also people advise pregnant women not to gaze
at repulsive animal faces, such cynocephali or apes, lest they should bear offspring resembling what they have seen. Indeed, the nature of women is such that what- ever sort of thing they look at or imagine in the extreme heat of desire, while they are conceiving, is the sort of progeny they will bear. Thus in the act of procreation an animal conveys external forms internally, and since she is filled with the images of these things, she com- bines their appearance with her own particular quality.
61. Among the animals those born of differing species are called hybrids (bigener), such as the mule from a mare and an ass, the hinny (burdo) froma stallion and a jenny, the hybrida from wild boars and domestic sows, the tityrus from a ewe and a he-goat, and the musmo from a she-goat and a ram. This latter is the leader of the flock.
ii. Beasts (De bestiis) 1. The term 'beast,' properly speaking, includes lions, panthers, tigers, wolves, foxes, dogs, apes, and other animals that attack either with their mouth or their claws, excepting serpents. They are called beasts (bestia) from the force (vis) with which they attack. 2. They are termed wild (ferus) because they enjoy a natural freedom and are driven (ferre) by their own desires - for their wills are free and they wander here and there, and wherever their spirit leads, there they go.
3. The term 'lion' (leo, gen. leonis) is of Greek origin but is declined in Latin, for it is called 2sYv in Greek, and it is a mongrel term, because it is partly corrupt. But 'lioness' (leaena) is completely Greek, just as 'dragoness' (dracaena) is. It is a usage among poets that leaena is called lea. And the Greek word leo is translated as 'king' in Latin, because he is the ruler of all the beasts. 4. His kind is said to be of three types. Of these the small ones with curly manes are peaceful, and the long ones with straight manes are fierce. Their foreheads and tails reveal their spirit. Theirstrengthisindicatedintheirchest, their steadfastness in their head. When surrounded by hunters they look at the ground so as not to be frightened by the
sight of hunting spears. They fear the rattle of wheels, but they fear fire even more. 5. Even when they are sleeping their eyes are watchful. When they walk their tail brushes away their tracks, so that a hunter cannot find them. When they bear their cubs, the cub is said to sleep for three days and nights, and then after that the roaring or growling of the father, making the den shake, as it were, is said to wake the sleeping cub. 6. Around humans, the lion's nature is such that unless they are hurt they are unable to become angry. Their tender-heartedness is obvious from continual examples, for they spare those who are lying prone, they allow captives whom they meet to return home, and they never kill a human except in great hunger. Concerning them Lucretius says (On the Nature of Things 5.1036):
And the cubs (scymnus) of lions.
7. The tiger (tigris) is so called because of its rapid flight, for this is what the Persians and Medes call an arrow. It is a beast distinguished by varied markings, amazing in its strength and speed. The river Tigris is called after the name of the animal, because it is the most rapid of all rivers. Hyrcania, in particular, produces tigers.
8. The panther (panther) is so called either because it is the friend of 'all' animals, except the dragon, or because it both rejoices in the society of its own kind and gives back whatever it receives in the same kind - for in Greek p?v means "all." This beast is ornamented with tiny round spots, in such a way that it is marked with little round eyes, varying black and white against a tawny background. 9. It only gives birth once. The reason for this characteristic is obvious, for when the cubs grow in their mother's womb and, as their powers mature, become strong enough to be born, they detest the delay in time so much that they tear with their claws at the laden womb since it is standing in the way of delivery. The mother gives birth to the cubs, or rather, driven by the pain, casts them out. Thus, afterwards, the generative seed, when it has been infused and received, does not adhere to the injured, scarred matrix of the womb, but recoils to no effect. Hence Pliny says (Natural History 8.43) that animals with sharp claws are unable to give birth many times, for they are injured by the cubs moving inside the womb.
10. The pard (pardus), comes next after the panther; this type has a mottled coat, and is extremely swift and
headlong for blood, for it rushes to kill with a leap.
11. The leopard (leopardus) is born fromthe cross-mating of a lioness and a pard, and yields a third breed. So also Pliny in his Natural History (cf. 8.42) says a lion mates with a female pard, or a male pard with a lioness, and from either union this mixed-breed offspring is created, just like a mule or hinny.
12. The rhinoceros (rhinoceron) is named with a Greek word; in Latin it means "horn on the nose." This is also the monoceron, that is, the unicorn (unicornus), because it has a single four-foot horn in the middle of its fore- head, so sharp and strong that it tosses in the air or impales whatever it attacks. It often fights with the ele- phant and throws it to the ground after wounding it in the belly. 13. It has such strength that it can be captured by no hunter's ability, but, as those who have written about the natures of animals claim, if a virgin girl is set before a unicorn, as the beast approaches, she may open her lap and it will lay its head there with all feroc- ity put aside, and thus lulled and disarmed it may be captured.
14. The Greeks believe that the elephant (elephans) is named from the size of its body, which looks like a moun- tain, for in Greek a mountain is called 2ó??oç. Among the inhabitants of India an elephant is called a barro after the sound it makes, whence also its trumpeting is called bar- ritus, and its tusks called ivory (ebur). Its snout is called a trunk (proboscis) because with it the beast moves its
'food to its mouth' (pabulum + os; cf. ßóom?tv, "to feed"), and it is like a snake protected by an ivory palisade.
15. These animals were called 'Lucan cows' by the ancient Romans; 'cows' because they had seen no animal larger than a cow, and 'Lucan' because it was in Lucania that Pyrrhus first set them against the Romans in battle. This kind of animal is suited to warfare, for the Persians and Indians, having set wooden towers on them, attack with javelins as if from a rampart. Elephants are very strong in intellect and memory. 16. They proceed in herds; they givea greeting witha gesture, as they can; they flee from mice; they mate facing away from each other; and when they give birth they deliver the offspring in the water or on an island on account of serpents, because serpents are their enemies, and kill them by coiling around them. They carry the fetus for two years, never bearing more than once nor more than one; they live three hundred years. At first elephants were found only in Africa and India, but now only India produces them.
17. The griffin (grypes) is so called because it is an ani- mal with feathers (perhaps cf. grus, "crane") and four feet (pes). This kind of wild animal is born in the Hyper- borean mountains. They are lions in their entire torso, but they are like eagles in their wings and faces. They are violently hostile to horses. They also tear humans apart when they see them. 18. The chameleon (chamaeleon) does not have one color alone, but is speckled with a diverse variety like the pard. It is named thus . . . The small body of the chameleon changes with a very easy transformation to whatever colors it may see, while the larger body size of other animals is not as suited to an easy transformation. 19. The giraffe (camelopardus) is so called because while it is speckled with white spots like the pard (pardus), it has a neck like a horse, ox-like feet, and a head like a camel (camelus). Ethiopia produces this animal.
20. The lynx (lyncis, i.e. lynx) is so called because it is reckoned among the wolves (lupus) in kind; it is a beast that has spotted markings on its back, like a pard, but it is similar to a wolf; whence the wolf has the name 2ámoç and the other animal, 'lynx.' People say that its urine hard- ens into a precious stone called lyncurius. That the lynxes themselves perceive this is shown by this proof: they bury as much of the excreted liquid in sand as they can, from a sort of natural jealousy lest such excretion should be brought to human use. Pliny Secundus (cf. Natural His- tory 8.43) says that lynxes do not bear more than one offspring. 21. Beavers (castor) are so called from 'castrat- ing' (castrare). Their testicles are useful for medicines, on account of which, when they anticipate a hunter, they castrate themselves and amputate their owngenitals with their teeth. Concerning them Cicero said in his Scaurian oration (2.7): "They ransom themselves with that part of their body for which they are most sought after." And Juvenal (Satires 12.34):
(The beaver) who makes himself a eunuch, wishing to escape with the loss of his testicles.
They are also called fibri, and also 'Pontic dogs.'
22. The bear (ursus) is said to be so called because it shapes its offspring in its 'own mouth' (ore suo), as if the word were orsus, for people saythat it produces unshaped offspring, and gives birth to some kind of flesh that the mother forms into limbs by licking it. Whence this is said (Petronius, Anthol. Latina, ed. Riese, 690.3):
Thus with her tongue the bear shapes her offspring when she has borne it.
But prematurity is what causes this kind of offspring; the bear gives birth after at most thirty days, whence it happens that its hurried gestation creates unshaped offspring. Bears have weak heads; their greatest strength is in their forepaws and loins, whence they sometimes stand up erect.
23. Wolf (lupus) comes into our language derived from Greek, for they call wolves 2ámoç; and 2ámoç is named in Greek from its behavior, because it slaughters whatever it finds in a frenzy of violence (perhaps cf. 2áooa, "rage"). Others say wolves are named as if the word were leopos, because their strength, just like the lion's (leo), is in their paws (pes). Whence whatever they tread on with their paws does not live. 24. It is a violent beast, eager for gore. Concerning the wolf, country folk say that a person loses his voice if a wolf sees him first. Whence to someone who suddenly falls silent one says, "The wolf in the story." Certainly if a wolf perceives that he is seen first, he puts aside his bold ferocity. Wolves do not copulate more than twelve days during the entire year. They endure hunger for a long time, and devour a large amount after a lengthy fast. Ethiopia produces wolves that have manes about the neck, and of such a variety of shades that people say that there is no color these wolves do not possess.
25. The Latin word 'dog' (canis) seems to havea Greek etymology, for the animal is called máYv in Greek. Still, some people think it is named for the sound (canor) of barking because it is loud, whence also the word 'sing' (canere). No animal is smarter than the dog, for they have more sense than the others. 26. They alone recognize their own names; they love their masters; they defend their master's home; they lay down their life for their master; they willingly run after game with their master; they do not leave the body of their master even when he has died. Finally, it is part of their nature not to be able to live apart from humans. There are two qualities found in dogs: strength and speed. 27. The offspring of any kind of animal are incorrectly called 'pups' (catulus), for, strictly speaking, pups are the offspring of dogs (canis), formed as a diminutive. 28. Dogs born from the chance mating
of wolves with dogs are called lycisci, as Pliny says (cf. Natural History 8.148). Also the Indians are accustomed to tie up female dogs in the forest at night, to expose them to wild tigers, and the tigers mount the dogs; from this mating are born dogs so fierce and strong that they overcome lions in combat.
29. Foxes (vulpes) are so named as if the word were volupes, for they are 'shifty on their feet' (volubilis + pes) and never follow a straight path but hurry along tortuous twistings. It is a deceitful animal, tricking others with its guile, for whenever it has no food it pretends to be dead, and so it snatches and devours the birds that descend to its apparent corpse.
30. 'Ape' (simia) is a Greek word, that is, 'with flattened nostrils' (cf. otµóç, "pug-nosed"), whence we name apes, becausetheyhaveflattenednostrilsandanuglyface, with disgustingly baggy wrinkles, although having a flattened nose is also characteristic of goats. Other people think that apes are named from a Latin word, because they are felt to have a great similarity (similitudo) to human behavior, but this etymology is false. 31. Apes, in their knowledge of the elements,5 rejoice at the new moon, and are downcast at the half moon and the crescent moon. They carry the offspring whom they love before them; the ones that are neglected cling to their mother. There are five kinds of apes. Of these the cercopitheci have tails, for it is the ape with a tail, which some peo- ple call the clura. 32. The sphinga (i.e. sphinx) is shaggy with hair, and has protruding breasts; they are tame to the point of forgetting their wildness. Cynocephali are themselves also similar to apes, but with a face like that of a dog, hence their name (cf. máYv, "dog"; m???a2?, "head"). 33. Satyrs (satyrus) have a somewhat pleasing appearance and are restless, with gesticulating move- ments. Callitriches are almost entirely different from the others in appearance, for they have a long beard on their face, and a broad tail.
34. The leontophonos (cf. 2?ovto-, "of a lion"; ??óvoç, "slaughter") is a small animal; it is so named because when captured it is burnt, and its flesh, sprinkled with ash and placed at the crossroads, kills lions, if they take even a small amount of it. 35. The porcupine (histrix) is an African animal similar to the hedgehog, named for the 'clattering' (stridor) of its quills, which it spreads out and shoots from its back, so as to wound any dogs that chase it. 36. The enhydros is a small beast so named because it dwells in water (cf. u6Yp, "water"),
particularly in the Nile. If these beasts discover a sleep- ing crocodile, first they roll themselves in the mud and then enter the crocodile's stomach through its mouth, and eat everything inside it, so that the crocodile dies. 37. The ichneumon (ichneumon) is so named from Greek (cf. "yv?á?tv, "track down"), because it recognizes both healthful foods and poisons by its sense of smell. Con- cerning this animal Dracontius (cf. Praises of God 1.515) says:
The suillus destroys (variant: "reveals") the force of any poison. 
Moreover, it is called suillus from its 'bristles' (saeta). This beast hunts snakes. When it fights against an asp, it raises its tail and the asp begins to see the tail as the most threatening. When the asp, thus deceived, turns its force on the tail, it is seized.
38. The mouser (musio) is so called because it is trou- blesome to mice (mus). Common people call it the cat (cattus) from 'catching' (captura). Others say it is so named because cattat, that is, "it sees" - for it can see so keenly (acute) that with the gleam of its eyes it overcomes the darkness of night. Hence 'cat' comes from Greek, that is, 'clever,' from ma(c)?o9at ("lit up," i.e. the passive form of ma(c)?tv, "kindle"). 39. The mole (furo) is named from 'dark' (furvus), whence also comes the word 'thief' (fur), for it digs dark and hidden tunnels and tosses out the prey that it finds. 40. The badger (melo, i.e. meles) is so named either because it has a very rounded mem- ber (cf. malum, µ?2ov, "round fruit"; cf. XVII.vii.3 and XIV.vi.28) or because it seeks honeycombs and carefully removes the honey (mel).
iii. Small animals (De minutis animantibus) 1. The mouse (mus) is a tiny animal. Its name is Greek, but any form declined from it becomes Latin. Some people say that they are called mice because they are born from the moisture of the earth, for mus is "earth," whence also the word 'soil' (humus). In these creatures the liver grows during the full moon, just as some marine animals grow larger at this time and grow smaller again when the moon is new. 2. 'Shrew' (sorex) is a Latin word, and it is so called because it gnaws and cuts things off like a saw (serra). The ancients said saurex for sorex just as they said claudus for clodus ("lame"). 3. The weasel (mustela) is so named as if it were a long mouse (mus), for a dart (telum) is so named due to its length. This animal, by
its nature, practices deceit in the houses where it nurses its pups, and it moves and changes its dwelling. It hunts snakes and mice. There are two kinds of weasels; one, which the Greeks call ­mttç, lives in the wild and is larger, while the other wanders into houses. Those people who suppose that the weasel conceives through its mouth and bears its young through its ear are mistaken.
4. The shrew-mouse (mus araneus, lit. "spider mouse") is called a spider because of its bite. There is a tiny animal in Sardinia with the shape of a spider that is called solifuga (lit. "sun-fleeing") because it avoids the daylight. It is plentiful in silver mines, crawling secretly, and it causes death for those who sit on it inadvertently.
5. The mole (talpa) is so called because it is condemned to perpetual blindness in the dark (tenebrae), for, hav- ing no eyes, it always digs in the earth, and tosses out the soil, and devours the roots beneath vegetables. The Greeks call it ?o???2a(. 6. Dormice (glis) are so called because sleep makes them fat, for we say that to grow is to 'swell' (gliscere). They sleep for the entire winter and lie motionless as if they were dead; in the summertime they revive. 7. The hedgehog (ericium) is an animal covered with quills, from which it is said to be named because it stiffens (subrigere) itself up with its quills when it is cornered; with these quills it is protected on all sides against attack. Immediately when it senses something it first stiffens itself up and, turning itself into a ball, cov- ers itself with its own shield of quills. This animal has a certain cleverness, for when it has plucked a grape from the vine, it rolls itself backwards over it and in this way takes it (i.e. stuck to the quills) to its offspring.
8. The cricket (gryllus) takes its name from the sound of its call. This animal walks backward, bores through the earth, and chirps at night. It may be caught by tossing an ant tied with a string into its hole, first making a puff of dust so that it doesn't hide itself. When the cricket grabs the ant, it is drawn out of its hole. 9. The ant (formica) is so named because it 'carries bits of grain' (fert micas farris). It has great shrewdness, for it provides
for the future and prepares during the summer what it consumes in the winter; during the harvest it selects the wheat and does not touch the barley. When it rains on the ant's grain, the ant throws it out. It is said that in Ethiopia there are ants in the shape of dogs, who dig up golden sand with their feet - they guard this sand lest anyone carry it off, and when they chase something they pursue it to death. 10. The 'ant lion' (formicoleon) is so called either because it is the lion (leo) of ants or, more likely, because it is equally an ant and a lion, for it is a small animal very dangerous to ants because it hides itself in the dust and kills the ants carrying grain. And thus it is called both an 'ant' and a 'lion,' because to the rest of the animals it is like an ant, but to ants it is like a lion.
iv. Snakes (De serpentibus) 1. 'Serpent' (anguis) is the term for the family of all snakes, because they can bend and twist; and thus it is anguis because it is 'turned at angles' (angulosus) and never straight. Snakes were always considered among the pagans as the spirits of places, whence Persius (Satires 1.113):
Paint two snakes; boys, the place is sacred. 
2. The coluber (i.e another word for 'snake') is named thus because it 'inhabits the shadows' (colit umbras) or because it glides in slippery (lubricus) courses with sin- uous curves. And whatever slips away when it is grasped is called 'slippery' - like the fish and the snake. 3. The snake (serpens) takes its name because it creeps (serpere) by secret approaches; it crawls not with open steps but by tiny thrusts of its scales. But those animals that support themselves on four feet, like the lizard and the newt, are not snakes, but are called reptiles (reptile). Snakes are also reptiles, because they crawl (repere) on their stomach and breast. Of these animals there are as many poisons as there are kinds, as many varieties of danger as there are of appearance, and as many causes of pain as there are colors.
4. The dragon (draco) is the largest of all the snakes, or of all the animals on earth. The Greeks call it 6p?mYv, whence the term is borrowed into Latin so that we say draco. It is often drawn out of caves and soars aloft, and
disturbs the air. It is crested, and has a small mouth and narrow pipes through which it draws breath and sticks out its tongue. It has its strength not in its teeth but in its tail, and it causes injury more by its lashing tail than with its jaws. 5. Also, it does not harm with poison; poison is not needed for this animal to kill, because it; kills whatever it wraps itself around. Even the elephant with his huge body is not safe from the dragon, for it lurks around the paths along which the elephants are accustomed to walk, and wraps around their legs in coils and kills them by suffocating them. It is born in Ethiopia and India in the fiery intensity of perpetual heat.
6. 'Basilisk' (basiliscus) is a Greek word, translated into Latin as "little king" (regulus; cf. ßaot2?áç, "king"), because it is the king of the snakes, so that they flee when they see it because it kills them with its odor - it also kills a human if it looks at one. Indeed no fly- ing bird may pass unharmed by the basilisk's face, but however distant it may be it is burnt up and devoured by this animal's mouth. 7. However, the basilisk may be overcome by weasels. For this reason people take weasels into caves where the basilisk lies hidden; and as the basilisk takes flight at the sight, the weasel chases it down and kills it. Thus the Creator of nature sets forth nothing without a remedy. It is half a foot in length, and marked with white spots. 8. Basilisks, like scorpions, seek after parched places, and when they come to water they become hydrophobic - ú6pojóßoç - and frantic. 9. The sibilus (lit. "the hissing one") is the same as the basilisk, and it kills by means of a hissing, before it bites and burns.
10. The viper (vipera) is so named because it is 'born through force' (vi parere), for when their mother's womb is groaning to deliver, the offspring, not waiting for nature's suitable time, gnaw at and forcibly tear open their mother's sides, causing her death. Lucan (Civil War 6.490) says:
When the body has burst apart, the knotted vipers gather.
11. It is said that the male spits his seed into the mouth of the female viper, and she, turned from the passion of lust to rage, bites off the head of the male that is in her mouth. Thus it happens that each parent dies; the male when they mate and the female when she gives birth. From the viper comes the pill that the Greeks call 9?ptamóç.
12. The asp (aspis) is named thus because with its bite it introduces and scatters (spargere) venom, for the Greeks call venom "óç. Whence the term 'asp,' because it kills with a venomous bite. There are different kinds with different appearances, some more harmful than others. And it is said that when an asp begins to give in to an enchanter who has called it with certain special chants so that he may draw it from its cave, and the asp does not want to come out, it presses one ear against the ground and blocks and closes up the other with its tail [so that] by not hearing the magic words it does not go out to the enchanter. 13. The dipsas is a type of asp, called situla in Latin because whomever it has bitten dies of thirst (sitis).
14. The hypnalis,a type of asp, is so called because it kills by means of sleep (cf. upvoç, "sleep"). Cleopatra held this snake to herself and thus was overcome by death as if by sleep. 15. The haemorrhois asp is so named because whoever has been bitten by it exudes blood, with the effect that as the veins dissolve it draws out through the blood whatever life there is - for blood is called a³µa in Greek.
16. The prester asp hurries with its mouth always open and steaming. The poet recalled this animal thus (Lucan, Civil War 9.722):
The greedy prester, swelling out its steaming mouth.
Whoever it strikes swells up and is killed by a tremen- dous bodily swelling, and this swelling is accompa- nied by putrefaction. 17. The seps, a corrosive asp that, when it has bitten a person, immediately consumes him, so that the victim is entirely liquefied in the snake's mouth. 18. The horned (cerastes) serpent is so called because it has horns on its head like a ram, for the Greeks call horns mspata. It has four small horns, and it displays them as if they were food, so that it kills the animals roused by this enticement. It covers its entire body with sand, and reveals no sign of itself except that part by which it attacks the birds and animals that it has lured. And it is more flexible than other snakes, so that it seems to have no spine. 19. The scytale snake is so named because it gleams with so much variegation of its skin that it slows onlookers by the charm of its markings (perhaps cf. scintilla, "spark, glimmer"). And because it is rather slow at crawling, it captures those it is too slow to catch when they are mesmerized and won- dering at it. It is an animal of such heat that even in the
winter it sheds the skin of its heated body. Concerning it Lucan says (Civil War 9.717):
And only the scytale will shed its skin with frost still scattered about.
20. The amphisbaena is named because it has two heads (cf. ?µ??(c)ç, "on both sides"; ßa(c)v?tv, "go"), one in the proper place and one on the tail, and it advances with both heads leading, its body trailing in a loop. This alone of the snakes trusts itself to the cold, and comes out first of all the serpents. Concerning it Lucan says (Civil War 9.719):
Grievous is the amphisbaena, turning toward its two heads.
Its eyes glow like lamps. 21. The enhydris isa serpent liv- ing in the water, for the Greeks call water u6Yp. 22. The hydros is an aquatic snake; people struck by it become swollen. Some people call the ill effects of this boa, because it is remedied with cow (bos) dung. 23. The hydra (hydra) is a dragon with many heads; this kind of dragon was in the Lernean swamp in the province of Arcadia. It is called excetra in Latin, because when one head is 'cut off, three' (caesus tria) more grow back. But this is only a story; for it happens that Hydra was a place that spewed out floods that devastated the neighboring city. If one outlet for the water were closed up in this Hydra, many others would burst forth. When Hercules saw this he dried up the place itself and thus closed up the path of the floods. Hydra is named from 'water' (cf. u6Yp, "water").
24. The chelydros is a snake that is also known as the chersydros, as if it were cerim, because it dwells both in the water and on land; for the Greeks call land yspooç and water u6Yp. These make the earth on which they move smoke, as Macer thus describes it (fr. 8):
Whether their backs froth out poison, or it smokes on the earth, where the hideous snake crawls.
And Lucan (Civil War 9.711):
And the chelydri drawn along with their smoking trails.
But it always proceeds in a straight line, for if it turns when it moves, it immediately makes a sharp noise.
25. The natrix is a snake that contaminates water with its
poison. Whatever spring it was in, it would mix its poison into it. Concerning it Lucan says (Civil War 9.720):
The natrix, polluter of water.
26. The cenchris (i.e. a kind of spotted snake) is a snake that cannot bend so that it always makes a straight path. Whence Lucan (Civil War 9.712):
The cenchris, always bound to crawl in a straight path.
27. The parias is a snake that always travels on its tail, and appears to make a furrow. Again, Lucan said this concerning it (Civil War 9.721):
Whence the parias is pleased to plow a path with its tail.
28. The boa (boas), a snake in Italy of immense size, attacks herds of cattle and buffaloes, and attaches itself to the udders of the ones flowing with plenty of milk, and kills them by suckling on them, and from this takes the name 'boa,' from the destruction of cows (bos). 29. The iaculus is a flying snake. Concerning it Lucan says (Civil War 9.720):
And the flying iaculi.
For they spring up into trees, and whenever some ani- mal happens by they throw (iactare) themselves on it and kill it, whence they are called iaculus (cf. iaculum, "javelin"). Also in Arabia there are snakes with wings, called sirens (sirena); they move faster than horses, but they are also said to fly. Their venom is so powerful that when someone is bitten by them death ensues before the pain is felt. 30. The ophites is so named because it has the color of sand. Concerning it the poet says (Lucan, Civil War 9.714):
How the Theban ophites is painted with small spots, and the ammodytes, of the same color as parched sand and indistinguishable from it. 
31. The seps is a small snake that consumes not only the body but also the bones with its venom. The poet refers to it thus (Lucan, Civil War 9.723):
The corrosive seps, dissolving bones along with the body.
32. 
The dipsas is said to be a snake so tiny that when it is stepped on it is not observed. Its venom kills before it is felt, so that the face of one about to die displays no horror of his impending death. Of this one the poet says (cf. Lucan, Civil War 9.737):
With its head twisted back the dipsas, when it was stepped on, bit the young standard-bearer Aulus, of Tyrrhenian blood; there was barely any pain or sensation of fangs.
33. The salpuga is a snake that is invisible. The caecula is so named because it is small (i.e. has the diminutive ending -ula) and has no eyes (cf. caecus, "blind"). The centipede (centupeda) is so named for the great number of its feet (pes, gen. pedis). 34. The lizard (lacertus) is a type of reptile, so named because it has arms (cf. lacertus, "upper arm"). There are many kinds of lizards, such as the botrax, the salamander, the saura, and the newt.
35. The botrax is so named because it has the face of a frog, for the Greeks call the frog ß?tpayoç. 36. The salamander (salamandra) is so named because it prevails against fire. Of all the venomous creatures its force is the greatest; the others kill people one at a time, but the salamander can slay many people at once - for if it should creep in among the trees, it injects its venom into all the fruit, and so it kills whoever eats the fruit. Again, if it falls into a well, the force of its venom kills whoever drinks from it. This animal fights back against fire; it alone of all the animals will extinguish fire, for it can live in the midst of flames without feeling pain or being consumed - not only because it is not burned but also because it extinguishes the fire.
37. The saura is a lizard whose eyes go blind as it grows old. It goes into a chink in an east-facing wall, and stretches out and receives light when the sun rises. 
38. The newt (stellio) has its name given according to its color, for on its back it is marked with glittering spots in the manner of stars (stella). Ovid says concerning it (Met. 5.460):
It has a name appropriate for its color, star-strewn (stellatus) with variegated spots on its body.
This animal is considered to be the antagonist of scor- pions, so that when it is seen by them it induces fear and stupefaction. 39. There are other kinds of snakes, such as the ammodyta, the elephantia, the chamaedraco. Finally, there are as many deaths caused by snakes as
there are names for them. Further, all snakes are cold by nature, and they do not strike except when they are warm. 40. When they are cold they injure no one; hence their venom is more noxious during the day than at night, for they are sluggish in the chill of the night, and understandably so, since they are cold in the evening dew. Thus their venom, which is cold by nature, draws to itself the warmth of their chilled bodies. Hence during the winter they lie motionless in coils, but in the summer they are uncoiled. 41. Hence it is that whenever someone is injected with snake venom, he is stupefied at first and then, when the poison is heated up in him and becomes fiery, it kills him forthwith.
Venom (venenum) is so named because it rushes through the veins (vena), for its destructive effect, once infused, travels through the veins when bodily activity increases, and it drives out the soul. 42. Hence venom is unable to cause harm unless it reaches a person's blood. Lucan (Civil War 9.614):
The pestilence of snakes is fatal when mixed in with blood.
Further, all venom is cold, and hence the soul, which is fiery, flees the cold venom. Among the natural advan- tages that we see are common to humans as well as to irrational animals, the snake excels in a certain quickness of sense. 43. Hence it is written in Genesis (cf. 3:1): "For the serpent was shrewder than all the beasts of the earth." And Pliny says (i.e. a false attribution from Servius), if it may be believed, that if a snake's head escapes with only two inches of its body, it will still live. Hence it will cast its entire body towards those striking it in order to save its head.
44. Vision in snakes generally is feeble - they rarely look directly forward, with good reason, since they have eyes not in the front of their face but in their temples, so that they hear more quickly than they see. No other animal darts its tongue as quickly as the snake, so that it appears to have three tongues when in fact it has one.
45. The snake's body is moist, so that it leaves a trail of moisture wherever it goes. The tracks left by snakes are such that, although they are seen to lack feet, they nevertheless crawl on their ribs with forward thrusts of their scales, which are spread evenly from the highest part of the neck to the lowest part of the belly. They support themselves on their scales, which are like nails, and with their ribs, which are like legs. 46. Hence if a 
snake is crushed by some blow to any part of the body, from the belly to the head, it is unable to make its way, having been crippled, because wherever the blow strikes it breaks the spine, which activates the 'feet' of the ribs and the motion of the body.
Snakes are said to live for a long time, because when they shed their oldskinthey are said to shed their 'old age' (senectus, also meaning the "cast-off" skins of snakes) and return to youth. 47. Snake skins are called 'castoffs' (exuviae) because when snakes age they 'cast off' (exuere) these skins from themselves, and having cast them off, return to youth. Likewise 'castoffs' and 'garments' (indu- viae) are so called because they are cast off and 'put on' (induere). 48. Pythagoras says that a snake is created from the spinal cord of a dead person. Ovid mentions this in his Metamorphoses when he says (15.389):
There are those who believe the human spinal cord is changed to a snake when the spine, in the sealed sepulcher, has rotted.
This, if it is believed, occurs with some justice, in that as a human's death comes about from a snake, so a snake comes about from a human's death. It is also said that a snake will not dare to strike a naked human.
v. Vermin (De verminibus) 1. Vermin (vermis) are animals that are generated for the most part from flesh or wood or some earthy substance, without any sexual congress - but sometimes they are brought forth from eggs, like the scorpion. There are vermin of the earth, the water, the air, flesh, leaves, wood, and clothing. 2. Spi- ders (aranea) are vermin of the air (aer), named from the air that is their nourishment. They spin out a long thread from their little body and, constantly attentive to their webs, never leave off working on them, maintain- ing a perpetual suspension in their own piece of crafts- manship. 3. The leech (sanguisuga) is a water vermin, so named because it sucks blood (sanguinem sugere). It lies in wait for creatures when they are drinking, and when it glides into their throat, or attaches itself somewhere, it drinks in their blood. When it is sated by too much blood, it vomits out what it has drunk so that it may once more suck in fresher blood. 4. Scorpions (scorpio) are land vermin; they are counted more appropriately among the vermin than among the snakes. The scorpion
is an animal armed with a sting, and was named from this in Greek (cf. omopp(c)oç), because it stings with its tail and infuses venom through the bow-shaped wound. It is characteristic of the scorpion that it does not attack the palm of the hand.
5. The 'Spanish fly' (cantharis) is a land vermin [that with its burning makes blisters full of liquid as soon as it is applied to the human body]. 6. The multipes is a land vermin, so named from its 'great number of feet' (multitudo pedum); it rolls up into a ball when it is touched. They are generated under rocks, out of the moisture and earth. 7. Slugs (limax) are mud vermin, so named because they are generated either in mud (limus) or from mud; hence they are always regarded as filthy and unclean. 8. Silkworms (bombyx) are leaf vermin. Silk- cloth (bombycinum) is prepared from their web. They are called by this name because they are emptied out when they spin their thread, and air alone remains inside them. 9. Cankerworms (eruca) are leaf vermin that are wrapped up in vegetable greens or in vine-leaves; they are named from 'gnawing away' (erodere). Plautus refers to them in (The Casket 728):
He folds himself up, imitating a vile, malignant beast wrapped in a vine-leaf.
This animal does not fly as the locust does, hurrying here and there and leaving half-consumed plants behind it; instead it remains on the fruit, which is doomed to die, and consumes everything with slow gliding and lazy bites.
10. The Greeks call wood vermin teredo (i.e. t?p?6Ûv) because they 'eat by grinding' (terendo edere). We call them wood-worms (termes, i.e. tarmes). So wood ver- min are called by Latin speakers; trees that are felled at the wrong time generate these vermin. 11. Moth-worms (tinea) are clothes vermin, so named because they hold fast (tenere), and they settle in right at the place they eat away. Whence also the word 'tenacious' (pertinax) for someone who keeps at the same thing again and again.
12. There are flesh vermin: the hemicranius, the maw- worm, the ascaris, the costus, the louse, the flea, the nit (lens), the tarmus, the tick, the usia, the bed-bug.
13. Hemicranius is the name of a vermin of the head. The maw-worm (lumbricus) is a vermin of the intestines, named as if the word were lumbicus, because it glides (labi) or because it is found in the loins (lumbus). Ascaris . . . Costus   14. Lice (peduculus) are skin ver-
min named from the feet (pes, gen. pedis). Hence those on whose bodies lice swarm are called peducosus. 15. But fleas (pulex) are so named because they are mainly nour- ished by dust (pulvis). Nits   The tarmus is a vermin
found in fat. The tick (ricinus) is a vermin found on dogs (canis), so called because it sits in the 'ears of dogs' (auribus canum), for máYv is the Greek word for dog.
16. The usia is a vermin of swine, named because it 'burns' (urere, ppl. ustum), for wherever it has bitten, that spot becomes so inflamed that blisters are formed there. 17. The bedbug (cimex) is named for its similar- ity to a certain plant (i.e. cimicia; see XVII.ix.57) whose stench it possesses.
18. In particular, vermin (vermis, here specifically "maggots") are generated in putrid meat, the moth- worm in clothing, the cankerworm in vegetables, the wood-worm in wood, and the tarmus in fat. 19. Ver- min do not crawl with obvious steps, or with a pushing of scales as snakes do, because vermin do not possess the strong support of a spine, as in serpents. Rather, they achieve motion by extending the contracted parts of their little bodies forward by degrees, and contracting them again, and set moving like this they glide along.
vi. Fish (De piscibus) 1. Fish (piscis) are named from the same source as livestock (pecus), that is, from 'graz- ing' (pascere). 2. Animals that swim are called reptiles (reptile), because they possess the look and natural habit of creeping (reptare); even though they submerge them- selves in the deep, still they creep in their swimming. Hence David says (cf. Psalm 103:25 Vulgate): "This sea is great and spacious; there are creeping things (reptilis) without number." 3. Amphibians (amphibia) are a cer- tain type of fish, so called because they possess the habit of walking on the land and the action of swimming in the water - for in Greek ?µ??(c) means "both," that is, because they live (cf. ßtóY , "live") both in water and on land - such as seals, crocodiles, and hippopotami, that is, 'river horses.'
4. People gave names to livestock and beasts and fly- ing animals before naming fish, because the former were seen and recognized before. Later, as the types of fish gradually came to be known, names were established based either on a similarity to land animals or on their particular appearance or behavior [or color or shape or sex]. 5. Based on a similarity to land animals, such as 'frogs' (i.e. "frog-fish," and so for the rest) and 'calves' and 'lions' and 'blackbirds' and 'peacocks,' colored with various hues on the neck and back, and 'thrushes,' mot- tled with white, and other fish that took for themselves the names of land animals according to their appear- ance. Based on land behavior, such as 'dogs' in the sea, so called from land dogs because they bite, and pikes (lupus, lit. "wolf"), because they pursue other fish with cruel voracity. 6. Based on color, as the maigre (umbra, lit. "shadow"), which are the color of shadows, and 'gilt- heads' (aureta), because they have the color of gold (aurum) on theirheads, and varii from variegation; these are commonly called 'trout' (tructa). Based onshape, like the orbis (lit. "circle"), because it is round and consists entirely of its head, and like the sole (solea) because it looks like the sole (solea) of a shoe. Based on sex, like the musculus, because it functions as the male (masculus) for whales; for it is said that 'female sea-monsters' (bel- lua) conceive through intercourse with these animals. Hence also the mussel (musculus cochlearum), by whose milt oysters conceive. 7. Whales (ballena) are beasts of enormous size, named from casting forth and spraying water, for they throw waves higher than the other sea animals; in Greek ß?22?tv means "cast forth." 8. The sea-monster (cetus, plural cete) is named m?toç, plural m?t?, that is, on account of its vastness. These are huge types of sea-monsters (bellua), and their bodies are the same size as mountains. Such a cetus swallowed Jonah; its belly was so big that it resembled hell, as the prophet says (cf. Jonah 2:3): "He heard me from the belly of hell."
9. Sea-horses (equus marinus), because they are horses (equus) in their front part and then turn into fish. Bogues (boca) are said to be marine 'cows' (bos), as if the word were boacas. 10. The caerulei (lit. "azure") are named from their color, for azure is green mixed with black, like the sea. 11. Dolphins (delphin) have their appointed name because they follow the voices (cf. ??Yv?, "voice") of humans, or because they gather in a group at the sound of music (symphonia). Nothing in the sea is faster than they are, for they often jump over ships as
they leap. When they play in the billows and dash them- selves headlong against the mass of the waves in their leaping, they seem to portend storms. Properly, they are called simones. There is a kind of dolphin in the Nile with a saw-tooth back; it kills crocodiles by cutting the soft parts of their bellies. 12. Sheatfish (porcus marinus, lit. "sea pigs"), commonly called suilli (lit. "small swine"), are so named because when they seek food they root up the earth underwater like swine. At their throat they have what functions as a mouth, and unless they sub- merge their snout into the sand, they do not collect food.
13. Corvi (lit. "ravens") are named 'from the sound of their breast' (a cordis voce), because they croak in their breast and, betrayed by their characteristic sound, they are captured.
14. The tuna (thynnus) has a Greek name. They come in the spring. They approach on the right and depart on the left; hence it is believed that they see more acutely with the right eye than with the left. 15. The swordfish (gladius) is so called because it has a snout like a sword (cf. gladius, "sword"); because of this it pierces ships and sinks them. 16. The saw-fish (serra, lit. "saw") is so named because it has a serrated (serratus) crest, and cuts through boats when it swims under them. 17. The scorpion-fish (scorpio) is so called because it causes injury when it is picked up in the hand. They say that when ten crabs are bound with a bundle of basil, all the nearby scorpion- fish will gather in that spot. 18. The weever (aranea, lit. "spider") is a kind of fish so called because it strikes with its ear (auris); for its ear has stingers with which it attacks.
19. The crocodile (crocodillus), named from its saffron (croceus) color, is born in the Nile. It is a quadruped animal, powerful on land and also in the water. It is commonly twenty cubits in length, armed with huge teeth and claws, with skin so tough that it repels blows from stones, however strong, against its back. 20. It rests in the water at night, and on the land during the day. It incubates its eggs on land, the male and the female taking turns to guard them. Certain fish with a serrated
crest may kill a crocodile by sawing into the soft parts of its belly (see section 11 above). [It is said to be the only animal that moves its upper jaw]. 21. The hippopotamus (hippopotamus) is so named because it is similar to the horse (cf. ¯ppoç, "horse") in its back, its mane, and its neighing; its snout is tilted back, and it has boar-like teeth anda curled tail. It stays in the water (cf. potaµóç, "river") during the day and grazes on crops at night. The Nile also produces this animal.
22. The pagrus (perhaps the sea-bream or the fraize), whichthe Greekscall ???ypoçbecauseitsteetharesohard that it feeds on oysters in the sea (perhaps cf. ??ay?±v, "eat"). 23. The bream (dentix) is named for the great number and size of its teeth (dens, gen. dentis). The sea- hare (lepus, lit. "hare") is named for the similarity of its head to that of a hare. 24. The pike (lupus, lit. "wolf"), as has been said, is named for its voracity. It is a difficult fish to catch; it is said that when a pike is surrounded by a net, it digs into the sand with its tail, and, hidden in this way, slips by the net. 25. The 'red mullet' (mullus) is named because it is soft (mollis) and verydelicate. People say that as food red mullets inhibit desire and dull the acuity of the eyes. People who often eat them smell of fish. When a red mullet is killed in wine, those who drink from it develop a distaste for wine. 26. The 'gray mullet' (mugilis) takes its name from being 'very agile' (multum agilis), for wherever they sense fishermen's traps they imme- diately turn back to leap over the net, so that you may see the fish fly. 27. The black-tail (melanurus) is named because it has a black tail (cf. oùp?, "tail") and black fins, and black lines on its body - for the Greeks call 'black' µs2aç. 28. The glaucus is named for its color, because it is white, for the Greeks call 'white' y2aUmóç. This fish rarely appears in the summer, except on cloudy days.
29. The thymallus takes its name from a flower - indeed the flower is called 'thyme' (thymus) - for although it is pleasing in appearance and agreeable in flavor, still, just like a flower, it smells and exhales aromas from its body. 30. The escarus (i.e. scarus) is so named because it is said to be the only one to ruminate its food (esca); for the other fish do not ruminate. People say that this is a clever fish, for when it is enclosed in a wicker trap, it does not break through with its brow or thrust its head through the opposing twigs, but, turning around, with repeated blows of its tail it widens an opening and so goes out backwards. If by chance another escarus sees its struggle from the outside, it helps its efforts to break out by seiz-
ing the tail with its teeth. 31. The sparus (lit. "spear," i.e. a small sea bream) takes its name from the throwing lance, because it has the same shape - for terrestrial things were discovered before marine ones. Sparus refers to a rustic throwing spear, so named for 'casting' (spargere).
32. The 'southern-fish' (australis piscis, properly the name of a constellation) is named either because it takes up (cf. (h)aurire, ppl. (h)austus, "drink," and cf. XIII.xi.6) a wave of water in its mouth (os, gen. oris) or because it appears (oriri) at the time when the Pleiades begin to decline in the west. 33. The rock-dwelling hamio is marked on its right and left sides by unbroken stripes of purple and other colors. It is called hamio because it is not caught except with a hook (hamus). 34. The remora (echenais), a small fish half a foot long, takes its name because it holds a ship fast by clinging to it. Even if winds rush and storms rage, still the ship seems to stand in the sea as if rooted, and is not moved, not as a result of being held back, but simply by being clung to. Latin speakers have named this the mora (lit. "delay") because it forces boats to stand still. 35. The uranoscopus (cf. oùpavóç, "heaven"; omop?±v, "gaze") is named from the eye that it has in its head, with which it is always looking upward.
36. The millago (perhaps the flying gurnard) is so named because it flies out over the water. And whenever it is seen flying above the water, the weather is changing. 37. The squatus is named because it has 'sharp scales' (squamis acutus). For this reason wood is polished with its skin. 38. The Syrian city now called Tyre was once called 'Sarra' after a certain fish that is abundant there, which they call sar in their language. From this name was drawn the name of small fish similar to these called sardae and 'sar- dines' (sardina). 39. The allec (i.e. hallec) is a small fish suitable for 'pickled fish sauce' (salsamentum; cf. ?2ç, "salt"), whence it is named. 40. The aphorus is a small fish that cannot be caught on a hook due to its small- ness (perhaps cf. ?jopoç with a sense like "unable to be held"). 41. The eel (anguilla) was given its name from its similarity to a serpent (anguis). Eels originate from mud; hence, when one is caught, it is so slippery that the tighter you hold it, the more quickly it slips away. They say that the river Ganges, in the East, produces eels thirty feet long. When eels are killed in wine, whoever drinks it then develops a distaste for wine.
42. The sea-dragon (draco marinus) has stingers in its arms, oriented toward the tail. When it strikes, it emits poison into whatever spot it attacks, [whence its name].
43. The Greeks call the murena (muraena) µápatva, because it twists itself in circles. People say this fish only exists in the female sex and that it conceives by means of a snake; on this account it can be summoned and caught by fishermen making a hissing sound like a snake. It can be killed with difficulty by a cudgel blow, but immedi- ately with a rod. It clearly has its vital principle in its tail, for when its head is beaten, it can scarcely be killed, but it dies immediately when the tail is struck. 44. Conger-eel (congrus)... The octopus (polypus), that is, 'with many feet' (cf. po2áç, "many"; poáç, "foot"), for it possesses many tentacles. This ingenious animal reaches for the hook and grasps it with its arms, not biting it, and it does not release the hook until it has eaten around the food on it. 45. The 'electric ray' (torpedo) is named because it makes the body become numb (torpescere) if anyone touches it while it is alive. Pliny Secundus recounts (cf. Natural History 32.7): "From the Indian Ocean the elec- tric ray, even if it is far distant, or if it is touched with a spear or stick, numbs one's muscle, no matter how strong it is, and fetters one's feet, no matter how swift they are." Its force is such that even the aura of its body weakens the limbs. 46. The cuttlefish (sepia) is named because it is more easily caught when it is hemmed in by enclosures (sepes, i.e. saepes). It is a disgusting species with respect to coition, for it conceives in its mouth as do vipers. There is so much strength in its black ink that some say that when it is placed in a lamp, with the light first removed, people appear to be Ethiopian. 47. The squid (lulligo, i.e. loligo): they say that in the Ocean by Mauretania, not far from the river Lixus, such a multi- tude of squid fly out from the water that they can even sink ships.
48. Shellfish (concha) and 'water snails' (cochlea) are so named because during the waning moon they are 'hollowed out' (cavare), that is, they are emptied out, for all the enclosed sea animals and shellfish have their body parts swell up with the waxing of the moon, and shrink back with its waning. Thus the moon, when it waxes, increases the humors, but when it wanes, the humors decrease - this is what natural philosophers say. The word concha is a primary noun, while cochlea is a diminutive, as if it were conchlea. 49. There are many kinds of shellfish, among which some are pearl-bearing. These are called oceloe; the precious stone is solidified in their flesh. People who have written on the nature of animals say concerning these creatures that they seek
the shore at night, and conceive the pearls by means of celestial (caelestis) dew; hence they are called oceloe.
50. The purple-fish (murex, also meaning "a sharp rock"; cf. XVI.iii.3) is a shellfish of the sea, named for its sharp- ness and roughness. It is called by another name, con- chilium (also meaning "a purple dye"), because when it is cut round with a blade, it sheds tears of a purple color, with which things are dyed purple. And from this ostrum (i.e. purple dye) is named, because this dye is drawn out from the liquid of the shell (cf. section 52 below).
51. Crabs (cancer) are so called because they are shell- fish (concha) possessing legs (crus, gen. cruris). They are animals hostile to oysters. With marvelous ingenuity they live on oyster flesh, for, because the oyster's strong shell cannot be opened, the crab spies out when the oyster opens the closed barricade of its shell, and then stealthily puts a pebble inside, and with the closing thus impeded, eats the oyster's flesh. Some people say that when ten crabs are bound with a bundle of basil, all the nearby scorpion-fish come to that place to mate. There are two kinds of crabs, river crabs and sea crabs.
52. The oyster (ostrea) is named from the shell with which the inner softness of its flesh is guarded, for the Greeks call a shell òotpa (i.e. ootpamov). People use the word ostrea as a neuter, but its flesh is of the feminine gender grammatically. 53. The mussel (musculus), as we have said above (see section 6), is a shellfish from whose milt oysters conceive, and they are called musculus as if the word were masculus (i.e. "male"). 54. The peloris (i.e. a kind of mussel) is named after Pelorus, a promontory in Sicily where they abound: (Vergil, Aen. 3.687):
Behold, Boreas from the narrows of Pelorus.
55. The unguis (perhaps the razor-fish) is named from its similarity to human nails (unguis). 56. The tortoise (testudo) is so called because its back is covered over with a shell (testa) in the manner of a vaulted roof. There are four kinds of tortoise: land turtles; sea turtles; mud tur- tles, that is, those living in mud and swamps; the fourth kind are the river turtles, which live in fresh water. Some people say - and this is unbelievable - that ships go more
16 Isidore may derive the term muraena from the biblical term murenula,a necklace - the latter word in fact derived from the former; cf. XIX.xxxi.14.
17 The term oceloe seems to be a corruption. Maxwell-Stuart pro- poses a connection with Greek òms22?tv, "run aground," as their shore-seeking may suggest - see Andre´'s note (1986).
slowly when they carry the right foot of a turtle. 57. The 'sea urchin' (echinus) has taken its name from the land echinus (i.e. "hedgehog"), which is commonly called iri- cius (i.e. ericius). The sea urchin's shell is two-fold, sharp with spines like chestnuts when they fall from the tree still covered. Its flesh is soft and like vermilion . . . in three ways: as a turtle, a mussel (peloris), and a sea- snail. Indeed, the part that we eat, as well as the part that contains the flesh, are both called 'mussel.'
58. Frogs (rana) are named from their garrulity (cf. rancare, "roar") because they fill their native swamps with noise, and make their voices resound in unruly croaking. Of these, some are called aquatic frogs, some swamp frogs, and some toads (rubeta, lit. "briar-patch") because they live in thorn bushes - these are larger than all the rest. Other frogs are called calamitis, because they live among reeds and bushes (cf. calamus, "reed"); they are the smallest and greenest of all, and are mute and without voice. 59. Agredulae are small frogs dwelling in dry places or in fields (ager), whence they are named. Some people claim that dogs will not bark if a live frog is given to them in a lump of food.
60. Sponges (sfungia) are named from 'tidying' (fin- gere), that is, polishing and cleaning. Afranius (fr. 415):
I approach you, so that I might tidy your neck with linen,
that is, that I might clean it. Cicero (cf. Defense of Ses- tius 77): "The blood would be wiped up (effingere) with sponges," that is, cleaned up. That the sponge is an ani- mal is shown by its blood clinging to the rocks. Hence also, when it is cut, it bleeds. 61. Some of the creatures living in water move about, like fish, but others stay fixed, like oysters, sea urchins, sponges. Of these, some sponges are said to be male, because their openings are small and more tightly packed, and others female, because they have larger, continuous openings. Some are harder - ones that the Greeks call tp?yoç (also meaning "goat"), and we can call them hircosa (lit. "goatish") on account of their roughness. 62. The softest kind of sponge is called penicillus because they are good for swellings of the eyes
and for cleaning away rheum. Sponges are made white with special treatment, for during the summer they are spread out in the sun, and like Punic wax they absorb whiteness.
63. Pliny (Natural History 32.142) says there are 144 names for all the animals living in the waters, divided into these kinds: whales, snakes common to land and water, crabs, shellfish, lobsters, mussels, octopuses, sole, Spanish mackerel (lacertus), squid, and the like. Of these, many recognize the order of their seasons by a kind of natural understanding, while some [wander in their places without change]. 64. Among female fish, some conceive by means of intercourse with a male, and bear offspring, while others deposit their eggs formed with- out any involvement on the part of the male, who, after the eggs have been deposited, floods them with the cast- ing of his seed. The eggs that have been touched by this service become fertile, but those that have not remain sterile and decay.
vii. Birds (De avibus) 1. There is a single word for birds, but various kinds, for just as they differ among them- selves in appearance, so do they differ also in the diver- sity of their natures. Some are simple, like the dove, and others clever, like the partridge; some allow themselves to be handled, like the falcon, while others are fearful, like the garamas; some enjoy the company of humans, like the swallow, while others prefer a secluded life in deserted places, like the turtledove; some feed only on the seeds they find, like the goose, while others eat meat and are eager for prey, like the kite; some are indigenous and always stay in the same location, like [the sparrow], while others are migratory and return at certain seasons, like the stork and the swallow; some are gregarious, that is, they fly in a flock, like the starling and the quail, while others are loners, that is, they are solitary, on account of the strategies of hunting, like the eagle, the hawk, and others of this type. Some make a racket with their calls, like the swallow. Some produce the sweetest songs, like the swan and the blackbird, while others imitate the speech and voices of humans, like the parrot and the magpie. 2. But there are innumerable others differing in kind and behavior, for no one can discover how many kinds of birds there are. Indeed, no one could penetrate all the wildernesses of India and Ethiopia and Scythia, so as to know the kinds of birds and their differentiating characteristics.
3. They are called birds (avis) because they do not have set paths (via), but travel by means of pathless (avia) ways. 'Winged ones' (ales, gen. alitis) because they strive 'with their wings for the heights' (alis alta), and ascend to lofty places with the oarage of their wings. 4. 'Flying ones' (volucres, plural of the adjective volucer, "flying," and also of the substantive volucris, "bird") from flying (volare), for we say 'fly' (volare) and 'walk' (ambulare) from the same root. The term vola means the middle part of the sole of the foot or the palm of the hand, and for birds vola is the middle part of the wings, by whose motion the feathers are put into action, hence volucer.
5. The young of all birds are called hatchlings (pullus), but the young of four-legged animals may also be called pullus, and a small human is a pullus. Therefore, those recently born are pulli, because they are stained (pollu- tus). Hence black clothing is also called pullus. 6. Wings are those appendages on which the feathers, fixed in order, offer the function of flight. They are called 'wings' (ala) because with them birds nourish (alere) and warm the hatchlings that they enfold. 7. Feathers (pinna) are named from 'being suspended' (pende¯re, 2nd conjuga- tion), that is, from flying - hence also the word pend?ere ("suspend," 3rd conjugation) - for flying creatures move with the aid of feathers when they commit themselves to the air. 8. Plumes (pluma) are named as if the word were piluma, for just as there are hairs (pilus) on the bodies of quadrupeds, so there are plumes on birds.
9. Many bird names are evidently constructed from the sound of their calls, such as the crane (grus), the crow (corvus), the swan (cygnus), the peacock (pavo), the kite (milvus), the screech owl (ulula), the cuckoo (cuculus), the jackdaw (graculus), et cetera. The variety of their calls taught people what they might be called.
10. The eagle (aquila) is named from the acuity of its vision (acumen oculorum), for it is said that they have such sight that when they soar above the sea on unmov- ing wings, and invisible to human sight, from such a height they can see small fish swimming, and descend- ing like a bolt seize their prey and carry it to shore with their wings. 11. It is said that the eagle does not even avert its gaze from the sun; it offers its hatchlings, suspended from its talons, to the rays of the sun, and the ones it sees holding their gaze unmoving it saves as worthy of the eagle family, but those who turn their gaze away, it throws out as inferior.
12. The vulture (vultur) is thought to be named from its 'slow flight' (volatus tardus), for indeed it does not have a swift flight, due to the size of its body. They say that some vultures do not unite in coition, but conceive and reproduce without copulation, and their offspring live to be almost one hundred years old. Vultures, just like eagles, can sense carrion even beyond the seas; indeed, when they are flying high, they can see many things from their height that are otherwise hidden by obscuring mountains. 13. The bird called gradipes by the Greeks is our 'bustard' (tarda, lit. "slow") because, held back by its heavy flight, it cannot mount high on the speed of its wings like other birds.
14. Cranes (grus) took their name from their particular call, for they whoop with such a sound. When they fly, they follow a leader in formation like a letter (i.e. ?, Greek lambda). Concerning them Lucan says (Civil War 5.716):
And the letter-shape is disturbed and lost in their scattered flight.
They seek the heights, from which they can more easily see which lands to make for. 15. The one leading the flock chides with its voice, but, when it begins to grow hoarse, another crane takes its place. At night they divide up the watches, and alternate their vigils; they hold stones in their extended claws to let it be known if they fall asleep - the noise (i.e. of the stones dropping) indicates the need to be on the alert. Their color reveals their age, for they turn black as they grow old.
16. Storks (ciconia) are named from the chattering noise they make, as if their name were cicania (cf. canere, i.e. "sing"). Although this sound is made with the mouth, it is not really a vocal call, because they produce it with a clapping of their beak. They are messengers of the spring, socially companionable, enemies of snakes; they cross the sea, and migrate into Asia in a gathered flock. Crows go ahead of them as leaders, and the storks follow just like an army. 17. They have an uncommon concern for their offspring, for they guard their nestlings so earnestly that they pull out their own feathers in assiduous brooding. Whatever length of time they give to rearing their chicks, for that same span they are themselves nourished in turn by their offspring.
18. The swan is the bird that the Greeks call mámvoç. It is called 'swan' (olor) because it is 'entirely' white in its plumage; for no one mentions a black swan; in Greek
'entire' is called o2oç. The cycnus (i.e. cygnus, another word for swan, borrowed, in fact, from the Greek mámvoç just cited) is named for singing (canere) because it pours out a sweetness of song with its modulated voice. It is thought to sing sweetly because it has a long curved neck, and a voice forcing its way by a long and winding path necessarily renders varied modulations. 19. People say that in the Hyperborean regions, when musicians are singing to citharas, swans come flocking in large num- bers, and sing with them quite harmoniously. Olor is the Latin name, for in Greek they are called mámvoç. Sailors say that this bird makes a good omen for them, just as Aemilius (Macer) says (fr. 4):
The swan is always the most fortunate bird in omens. Sailors prefer this one, because it does not immerse itself in the waves. 
20. The ostrich (struthio) is named witha Greek term; this animal is seen to have feathers like a bird, but it does not rise above the ground. It neglects to incubate its eggs, but the abandoned eggs are brought to life by the warmth the earth alone. 21. The heron (ardea) is named as if the word were ardua (i.e. "steep") - this is on account of its lofty flight. Lucan (Civil War 5.553) says:
And that the heron dared to fly.
It is afraid of rainstorms, and flies above the clouds so that it cannot feel the storms in the clouds, and whenever it flies higher, this indicates a storm. Many people call it the tantulus. 22. The phoenix (phoenix) is a bird of Ara- bia, so called because it possesses a scarlet (phoeniceus) color, or because it is singular and unique in the entire world, for the Arabs say phoenix for 'singular.' This bird lives more than five hundred years, and when it sees that it has grown old it constructs a funeral pile for itself of aromatic twigs it has collected, and, turned to the rays
of the sun, with a beating of its wings it deliberately kin- dles a fire for itself, and thus it rises again from its own ashes.
23. The cinnamolgus is also a bird of Arabia, called thus because in tall trees it constructs nests out of cinna- mon (cinnamum) shrubs, and since humans are unable to climb up there due to the height and fragility of the branches, they go after the nests using lead-weighted missiles. Thus they dislodge these cinnamon nests and sell them at very high prices, for merchants value cinna- mon more than other spices. 24. The parrot (psittacus) comes from the shores of India. It is green in color, with a scarlet collar and a large tongue, wider than that of other birds. Hence it pronounces articulate words so that if you did not see the bird you would think a human was speaking. It makes a greeting naturally, saying "Have!" (i.e. Ave,a Latin greeting) or "xa±p?!" (i.e. a Greek greet- ing). Other words it learns by being taught. Hence it is spoken of (Martial, Epigrams 14.73):
I, a parrot, would learn from you the names of others, but on my own I have learned to say this:
"Hail (Have), Caesar!"
25. The alcyon (i.e. "halcyon," in classical Latin, "king- fisher"), a sea bird, is named as if the word were ales oceana (ocean bird), because in winter it makes its nest and raises its young on still waters in the Ocean. It is said that when they are brooding on its expansive surface, the sea grows calm with the winds silent in continuous tranquillity for seven days, and nature herself cooperates in the rearing of their young. 26. The pelican (pelicanus) is an Egyptian bird inhabiting the solitary places of the river Nile, whence it takes its name, for Egypt is called Canopos. It is reported, if it may be true, that this bird kills its offspring, mourns them for three days, and finally wounds itself and revives its children by sprinkling them with its own blood.
27. The stymphalis is a bird named from the islands of Stymphades (cf. Stymphales, a lake in Arcadia), where they are abundant; Hercules used arrows against them. They are sea birds living on islands. 28. Diomediae are birds named from the companions of Diomedes; fables say that his companions were transformed into these very birds. They are similar to coots in shape, the size of a swan, white in color, with large hard beaks. They are found near Apulia on the island Diomedia, flying between the crags of the shore and the rocks. They
distinguish between their own people and foreigners.
29. If someone is Greek, they come up close and fawn on him, but if someone is of alien birth, they attack and wound him by biting, grieving as if with tearful voices either their own transformation or the death of their king - for Diomedes was slain by the Illyrians. These birds are called diomediae in Latin, but the Greeks call them spY6to(c) ("herons, shearwaters").
30. Memnonides are Egyptian birds named after the place where Memnon perished. They are said to fly in flocks from Egypt to Troy near the tomb of Memnon, and hence the Trojans call them memnonia. They come to Troy every fifth year, and after they have flown around for two days, on the third day they enter into a battle with each other, lacerating themselves with talons and beaks.
31. The hercynia is a bird named from the Hercynian forest of Germany where they are born. Their feathers sparkle so much in the shade that, however dark the night is with thick shadows, these feathers, when placed on the ground, give off light that helps to mark the way, and the sign of the glittering feathers makes clear the direction of the path. 32. The Greeks call the onocrotalos (i.e. another word for "pelican") a bird with a long beak. [There are two types of this bird; one aquatic and the other of the desert.] 33. The ibis (ibis) is a bird of the Nile river that purges itself by spurting water into its anus with its beak. This bird feeds on snake eggs, carrying the most pleasing food that it takes from them back to its nestlings.
34. The bee-eater (merops) is the same as the gaulus, who is said to guard its parents and feed them. The coredulus (perhaps "lark") is a type of bird, as if the name were cor edens (lit. "eater of the heart"). 35. The jackdaw (monedula) is a bird named as if the word were monetula (cf. moneta, "money") because whenever it finds gold it carries it off and hides it. Cicero, Defense of Valerius Flaccus (76): "No more gold should be entrusted to you than to a jackdaw (monedula)."
36. The bat (vespertilio) takes its name from the time of day, because it avoids the light and flies around in the dusk of evening (vespertinus), making darting move- ments and supported by delicate arm-like limbs. It is an animal similar to a mouse, producing not so much a call as a squeak. In appearance it is a quadruped at the same time as being equipped to fly; this is not usually found among other birds. 37. The nightingale (luscinia) is a bird that took its name because it is accustomed to
indicate by its song the onset of the rising sun, as if its name were lucinia (cf. lux, gen. lucis, "light, sun"). This same bird is also the acredula, concerning which Cicero says in his Prognostics (fr. 6):
And the acredula performs her morning songs.
38. The 'screech owl' (ulula) is a bird named from the word ò2o2áS?tv, that is, from wailing and lamenta- tion, for its calls resemble either weeping or groaning. Whence, according to augurs, if it hoots it is said to indi- cate sorrow, and if it is silent, prosperity. 39. The 'horned owl' (bubo) hasa name composed of the sound of its call; it is a wild bird, loaded with feathers, but always con- strained by heavy sluggishness; it is active among tombs day and night, and always lingers in caves. Concerning it Ovid said (Met. 5.549):
He has become a loathsome bird, messenger of approaching sorrow, the lazy owl (bubo), a dire omen for mortals.
Thus, according to augurs, it is said to portend ill fortune, for when it has been seen in a city, they say that it signifies desolation. 40. The 'night owl'(noctua) is namedbecause it flies around at night (nox, gen. noctis) and cannot see during the day, for when daylight appears, the night owl's vision is weakened. This bird is not found on the island of Crete, and if it should come there from somewhere else, it immediately dies. The night owl is not the same as the horned owl, for the horned owl is bigger. 41. The nycticorax is likewise a night owl, because it loves the night. It is a bird that flees the light and cannot bear to look at sunlight. 42. The strix (perhaps another word for the screech owl) is a nocturnal bird, taking its name from the sound of its call, for it screeches (stridere) when it calls. Lucan says concerning it (Civil War 6.689):
That which the restless horned owl and the nocturnal
strix lament.
This bird is commonly call the amma, from loving (amare) its young, whence also it is said to offer milk to its hatchlings.
43. The raven (corvus), or corax, takes its name from the sound of its throat, because it croaks (coracinare) with its voice. It is said that this bird does not fully pro- vide food for the young it has produced until it recog- nizes in them a similarity to its own color through the blackness of their feathers, but after it sees that they are horrible of plumage it nourishes them more abundantly, as completely acknowledged offspring. This bird seeks the eyes of a corpse before any other part. 44. The crow (cornix), a long-lived bird, is named by Latin speakers with a Greek word (i.e. mopÛv?). Augurs say that this bird by its signs is attentive to the concerns of humans, and shows the paths where ambush lies, and predicts the future. It is a great sin to believe that God would entrust his counsels to crows. Among many omens, they even ascribe to these birds the predicting of rain by their calls. Whence this passage (Vergil, Geo. 1.388):
Then the impudent crow calls the rain with its loud voice.
45. The jackdaw (graculus) is named for its garrulity (garrulitas); not, as some people would have it, because they fly 'in flocks' (gregatim), since it is quite clear that they are named for their call, for it is the most talkative species and importunate in its calls. 46. The magpie (pica), as if the word were 'poetic' (poetica), because they pronounce words with a distinct articulation, like a human. Perching on the branches of trees, they sound out in unmannerly garrulity, and although they are unable to unfold their tongues in meaningful speech, still they imitate the sound of the human voice. Con- cerning which someone has said, appropriately (Martial, Epigrams 14.76):
I, a chattering magpie, salute you as master with a clear voice - if you did not see me, you would deny that I am a bird.
47. The woodpecker (picus) took its name from Picus, the son of Saturn, because he would use this bird in augury. People say this bird has a certain supernatural quality because of this sign: a nail, or anything else, pounded into whatever tree the woodpecker has nested in, cannot stay there long, but immediately falls out, where the bird has settled. This is the Martius woodpecker (picus), for the magpie (pica) is another bird.
48. 
The peacock (pavo) has its name from the sound of its call. Its flesh is so hard that is scarcely experiences decay, nor is it easily cooked. Someone speaks of it in this way (Martial, Epigrams 13.70):
You marvel whenever it unfolds its jeweled wings; and can you, pitiless man, give this bird to the cruel cook?
49. The pheasant (phasianus) is named from Phasis, an island of Greece, whence it was first imported. This old distich bears witness to this (Martial, Epigrams 13.72):
I was transported first in an Argive ship - before that I knew nothing but Phasis.
50. The rooster (gallus) is named from castration, for of all the birds only this one has its testes removed. Indeed, the ancients used to call a castrated man a gallus. And just as the word leaena ("lioness") is formed from leo ("lion"), and dracaena ("dragoness") from draco ("dragon"), so gallina ("hen") is formed from gallus. The rooster's limbs, some people say, are consumed if they are mixed with molten gold.
51. The duck (ans, i.e. anas) takes its appropriate name from its persistent swimming (natare). Certain ones of the duck species are called 'true' (germanus) ducks because they are more nourishing than the others. 52. The duck gives its name to the goose (anser) by deriva- tion, either from their resemblance, or because it too is frequently swimming. The goose bears witness to its vigils at night with persistent honking. No other ani- mal is as sensitive to the smell of humans as is the goose; whence the ascent of the Gauls to the Capitolium in Rome was discovered from the noise of the geese.
53. The coot (fulica) is so named because its flesh tastes of hare; now 2ayÛç means "hare," whence this bird is also called 2ayÛç by the Greeks. It is a marsh bird, hav- ing its nest in the middle of the water or on rocks sur- rounded by water; it is always attracted to the deep seas. When it senses a storm approaching, the coot flees into the shallows and dallies there.
54. The mergus has its name from its continuous div- ing (mergere). Often, with its head lowered under the waves into the depths it gathers signs of winds and, fore- seeing a storm at sea, turns noisily to shore. There must be a very strong storm at sea when the mergi flee to the shore. 55. The hawk (accipiter) is a bird armed more with spirit than with talons, bearing great valor in its small body. It assumes its name from 'taking' (accipere),
that is, seizing, for it is a bird very eager to snatch up other birds, so that it is called accipiter, that is, 'raptor' (raptor). Whence the apostle Paul says (cf. II Corinthi- ans 11:20): "For you withstand it, if anyone takes from you" - where he meant "if anyone seizes (rapit)," he said "if anyone takes (accipit)." 56. It is said that hawks are undutiful toward their nestlings, for as soon as they see that the nestlings can try to fly, they no longer fur- nish them with any food, but beat their wings and cast them from the nest; and from infancy they compel them to hunt prey, lest perhaps as adults they should grow sluggish.
57. The capus is named in the language of Italy from 'seizing' (capere). We call this one the falcon (falco), because its talons are curved inward (cf. falx, gen. fal- cis, "sickle"). 58. The kite (milvus) is weak in both its strength and its flying, as if it were a 'weak bird' (mol- lis avis), whence it is named. However, it is most rapa- cious and is always a predator of domestic birds. 59. The osprey (ossifragus) is the common name for a bird that casts bones down from the heights and breaks them. Hence it takes its name from 'breaking bones' (ossa fran- gere). 60. The 'turtle dove' (turtur) is named from its call; it is a bashful bird, always dwelling in mountain heights and desert wildernesses. It flees human homes and interaction, and dwells in forests. [In winter, after it has lost its feathers, it is said to take shelter in hollow tree trunks.] In contrast to this, the dove loves human society; it is always a pleasant inhabitant in a house.
61. They are called doves (columba) because their necks (collum) change color every time they turn. They are tame birds, comfortable amid a large group of humans, and without bile. The ancients called them 'love birds,' because they often come to the nest and express their love with a kiss.
62. The wood-pigeon (palumbes) [from 'food' (pab- ulum), because they are stuffed - they are commonly called titus] is called a 'chaste bird' (avis casta) from its behavior, because it is a companion of chastity (castitas), for it is said to proceed alone after it has lost its mate, nor does it need any further carnal union. 63. The partridge (perdix) takes its name from its call. It is a crafty bird, and filthy, for the male mounts another male; its violent lust ignores gender. It is deceitful to the extent that it will steal and hatch the eggs of another, but this deceit is fruitless, for at last when the hatchlings hear the call of their true parent, through a kind of natural instinct
they abandon the bird that has reared them and return to the one who conceived them.
64. The quail (coturnix) is named from the sound of its call; the Greeks call them optUy?ç because they were first seen on the island of Ortygia (i.e. Delos). These birds have a season for their return migration, for, when they driven off by the summer heat, they cross the sea.
65. The bird that leads the flock is called an ortygometra. The hawk seizes this bird when it sees it approaching land; for this reason all quails are careful to secure a leader of a different species - through this carefulness they safeguard those first crucial moments. They have poisonous seeds as their favorite food; for this reason the ancients forbade their consumption. This animal alone suffers from 'falling sickness' (caducum morbum; see IV.vii.6), as do humans.
66. The Greeks name the hoopoe (upupa) thus because it would settle on human waste, and feed on foul dung. It is a most loathsome bird, helmed with a protruding crest, always dwelling in tombs and human waste. Anyone who anoints himself with the blood of this bird and then goes to sleep will see demons suffocating him. 67. The cuckoo (tucus), which the Spaniards call ciculus (i.e. cuculus), is named from its particular call. These birds have a proper season for their return migra- tion, at which time they are taken up on the shoulders of kites because of their brief and small spans of flight, lest their strength fail, fatigued by the long expanse of sky. Cicadas are born from their saliva. 68. Sparrows (passer) are tiny little birds, named from their smallness (parvi- tas), whence small things are also called pusilli.
69. The merle (merula) was called medula in ancient times, because it 'makes music' (modulare). Others say the merle is so named because it flies alone, as if the term were mera volans ("flying alone"). Although this is a black bird everywhere, it is white in Achaea. 70. The swallow (erundo, i.e. hirundo) is so named because it does not take food when it has alighted, but seizes and eats its food in the air (aer). It is a garrulous bird, flying around in convoluted loops and twisted circles, and it is very clever at constructing its nests and raising its young. It even has a certain foresight, for it abandons and never seeks out roofs that are about to fall in. Also, it is not attacked by fierce birds, nor is it ever their prey. It flies across the sea and remains there for the winter. 71. The thrush (turdus) is named from its tardiness (tarditas), for at the very beginning of winter it returns. The turdela
is a larger thrush, as it were. It is thought to produce mistletoe by means of its droppings. Whence the ancients had a proverb: "The bird shits trouble for itself." 
72. The furfurio (cf. furfur, "husk") is so named because formerly it used to feed after grain (far) had been ground into flour. 73. The figpecker (ficedula) is so named because it mostly eats figs (ficus). This is revealed by that ancient couplet (Martial, Epigrams 13.49):
Although the fig feeds me, since I am nourished by sweet grapes, why was it not the grape (uva) rather that gave me my name (i.e. uvedula)?
74. The goldfinch (carduelus), because it is nourished by thorns and thistles (carduus), whence among the Greeks it is also called acalanthis, from ?mav9a, that is, "thorn," by which it is nourished.
75. Augurs say that omens are found in the gestures and movements and flights and calls of birds. 76. Those birds are called oscines that produce auspices with their mouths (os) and their song (cantus), such as the raven, the crow, and the woodpecker. 77. The alites are those that seem to show the future by their flight (cf. ala, "wing"); if they are unpropitious, they are called inebrae, because they inhibit (inhibere), that is, they forbid; if they are propitious, they are called praepetes. The reason they are called praepetes is that all birds, when they fly, 'pur- sue what is ahead' (priora petere). 78. People define a third type of augur among the birds, which they call 'common'; it is a combination of both, this is, when birds provide omens from both their mouths and their flight. All this is not worthy of belief.
79. All species of birds are born twice. They are born first as eggs, after which they are formed and ani- mated by the warmth of their mother's body. 80. Eggs (ovum) are so called because they are 'moist' (uvidus). Whence also grapes (uva) are so named because they are full of liquid inside. Whatever has liquid on the out- side is 'wet' (humidus); whatever has it on the inside is 'moist.' Some believe that 'egg' has a Greek source for the term; the Greeks say ??, , with the letter v left out. 81. Some eggs are conceived by means of empty wind, but eggs are not fertile unless they have been
conceived by coition with the male and have been penetrated by the seminal spirit. People say that the strength of eggs is such that wood soaked with egg doesn't burn, and not even clothing becomes scorched. And when mixed with lime it is said to glue fragments of glass together.
viii. Tiny flying animals (De minutis volatibus) 1. Bees (apis) are so named either because they cling to each other with their feet (pes), or because they are born without feet (cf. a-, "without"), for they develop feet and wings afterwards. These animals, skilful at the task of cre- ating honey, live in allocated dwellings; they construct their homes with indescribable skill; they make their honeycombs from various flowers; they build wax cells, and replenish their fortress with innumerable offspring; they have armies and kings; they wage battle; they flee smoke; they are annoyed by disturbance. 2. Many people know from experience that bees are born from the car- casses of oxen, for the flesh of slaughtered calves is beaten to create these bees, so that worms are created [from] the putrid gore, and the worms then become bees. Specif- ically, the ones called 'bees' originate from oxen, just as hornets come from horses, drones from mules, and wasps from asses. 3. The Greeks name costri those larger bees that are created in the edges of the honeycomb; some people think they are the kings. They are so named because they rule the hive (castra). The drone is larger than a bee, and smaller than a hornet. And the 'drone' (fugus, i.e. fucus) is so called because it eats what is pro- duced by others, as if the word were fagus (cf. ??ay?±v, "eat"), for it eats food that it has not toiled over. Con- cerning it Vergil says (Geo. 4.168):
They keep the drones, a lazy flock, from the hives.
4. Wasps (vespa) . . . The hornet (scabro, i.e. crabro) is named from cabo, that is, from the packhorse (cabal- lus), because it is created from them. Just as hornets are born from the rotting flesh (caro) of horses, so scarabs (scarabaeus) are often born likewise from such flesh - whence they are named. 5. Earth scarabs, similar to ticks, are called tauri (lit. "bulls"). The buprestis (i.e. a ven- omous beetle) is a small animal in Italy, similar to the scarab, a long-legged animal. It lies in wait for cows (bos) in particular among the pasturage, whence it takes its name, and if it is eaten it so inflames with the contagion of its poison that the cow bursts. 6. The glow-worm
(cicindela) is a kind of scarab, named because it gives off light when it walks or flies (cf. candela, "candle").
7. Moths (blatta) are named from their color, since indeed they stain one's hand when they are caught, whence people also name a color 'purple' (blatteum). This animal cannot bear to see light, in contrast to the fly, for the fly is light-seeking and the moth is light-fleeing, and it only goes about at night. 8. Butterflies (papilio) are small flying creatures that are very abundant when mallows bloom, and they cause small worms to be gen- erated from their own dung. 9. Locusts (locusta, also meaning "lobster" or "crawfish") are so called because their legs are 'long, like spears' (longis . . . asta, i.e. hasta, "spear"). Whence the Greeks call the sea as well as the land creature ?otamóç (i.e. "lobster"). Cicadas (cicas, i.e. cicada) are born from the saliva of the cuckoo (ciculus). In the Reggio region of Italy these creatures are mute, but nowhere else.
11. The word for fly (musca) comes from Greek, as does 'mouse' (mus). These animals, just like bees, when drowned in water, sometimes revive after an hour has elapsed. 12. The cynomya is named with a Greek word, that is, a 'dog-fly,' for máYv is Greek for 'dog.' 13. The gnat
(culex) is named from 'sting' (aculeus) because it sucks blood, for it has a tube in its mouth, like a needle, with which it pierces the flesh so that it may drink the blood. 
14. Sciniphes are very tiny flies, very troublesome with their stinging. The proud populace of Egypt was struck down by these flies in the third plague (see Exodus 8:16- 18). 15. The horse-fly is associated with cattle, and is very troublesome with its stinging. The name for the horse- fly (oestrus) is a Greek word; in Latin it is called the asilus, and is commonly known as the tabanus.
16. Bibiones (i.e. drosophilae) are creatures that are generated in wine; they are commonly called mustiones from wine-must (mustum). Whence Afranius (fr. 407) says:
When you look towards me and begin to tell stories,
bibiones fly from your mouth into your eyes. 
17. The weevil (gurgulio, lit. "gullet") is so named because it is almost nothing except a throat (guttur).
