i. Rhetoric and its name (De rhetorica eiusque nomine) 1. Rhetoric is the art of speaking well in civil cases, [and eloquence (eloquentia) is fluency (copia)] for the purpose of persuading people toward the just and good. Rhetoric is named from the Greek term p?top(c)S?tv, that is, fluency of speech, for p?otç in Greek means "speech," p?tYp means "orator." 2. Further, rhetoric is connected with the art of grammar (Gram- matica), for in grammar we learn the art of speaking correctly, while in rhetoric we understand how we may express what we have learned.
ii. The founders of the art ofrhetoric (De inventoribus rhetoricae artis) 1. This discipline was invented by the Greeks, by Gorgias, Aristotle, and Hermagoras, and was carried over into Latin culture by Cicero and Quintilian [and Titianus],1 but so copiously and variously that it is easy for a reader to wonder at it, but impossible to grasp it fully. 2. For while one has a treatise on rhetoric in hand, the sequence of its content as it were clings to the memory, but when it is set aside all recollection of it soon slips away. Accomplished knowledge of this discipline makes one an orator.
iii. The term 'orator' and the parts of rhetoric (De nomine oratoris et partibus rhetoricae) 1. An orator therefore is a good man, skilled in speaking. A man's goodness is based on his nature, his behavior, his train- ing in the arts. One skilled in speaking is grounded in artful eloquence, which consists of five parts: invention, arrangement, style, memory, pronunciation (inventio, dispositio, elocutio, memoria, pronuntiatio), and of the goal of this office, which is to persuade of something.
2. Further, this skill in speaking is based on three things: one's nature, instruction, and practice. Nature, from one's native wit; instruction, from acquired knowledge;
practice, from diligence. And these are things that are looked for not only in an orator, but in any person with regard to his craft, in order that he might accomplish something.
iv. The three kinds of arguments (De tribus generibus causarum)2 1. There are three kinds of arguments: deliberative, demonstrative, and judicial (deliberativus, demonstrativus, iudicialis). The deliberative kind treats questions of expediency in life, what ought or ought not to be done. The demonstrative is the kind in which a praiseworthy or reprehensible person is displayed as such. 2. Judicial, in which a decision for punishment or reward is rendered according to the deed of that person. It is called 'judicial' because it judges (iudicare) a man, and its decision shows whether a praiseworthy person may be worthy of a reward, or whether a person surely charged with a crime may be condemned or freed from punishment.
3. The deliberative kind is so called because in it one deliberates (deliberare) concerning some matter. There are two types of this kind, suasion and dissuasion, that is, concerning what ought to be sought and what ought to be avoided, what ought to be done and not done. 4. Suasive argument is further divided into three topics: the decent, the useful, and the possible. This differs some- what from deliberative argument in that suasive argu- ment has to do with another person, whereas deliberative argument sometimes deals with oneself alone. Further, in suasive argument two things are especially effective: hope and fear.
5. Demonstrative argument is so called because it describes (demonstrare) some particular thing, either by praising or by blaming. This class has two species: praise (laus) and blame (vituperatio). The sequence of praising is divided into three periods of time: before, during, or after the act or person being praised. 6. Before, as (Vergil, Aen. 1.605):
What such happy times brought you forth?
in the present, as (Aen. 1.597):
O you alone in pitying the unspeakable hardships of Troy;
after, as (Aen. 1.607):
As long as rivers run into the sea, as long as shadows traverse the mountains, your honor, your name, your praises will remain always.
7. With an equal and inverted type of argument, this pattern is preserved in blaming a person: before, during, or after the present circumstances of the person.
A commonplace (locus communis) pertains to the demonstrative class of blaming, but it differs from it in a certain way, for blame, which is the opposite of praise, is directed especially to the particular character of the doer, 8. whereas a commonplace is rather set forth in a general way with regard to the wickedness of the thing done. Hence it is called a commonplace, because, in the absence of personal characteristics, it treats not so much a particular individual as the wicked deed itself. Indeed, every vice is found not in one person only, but as com- mon to many.
v. The two states of legal arguments (De gemino statu causarum) 1. For rhetoricians, that matter in which a case (causa) has standing is called its 'state' (status), that is, the issue (constitutio). Greek speaks of a 'state' from ot?otç, "contention." The Latin term however is not only from battle, in which adversaries battle over a proposition, but also because in it each party 'has stand- ing' (consistere). A state consists of the charge and the rebuttal. 2. The states of cases are two: rational (ratio- nalis) and legal (legalis).
From the rational state arise the classes conjecture, purpose, quality, transference (coniectura, finis, quali- tas, translatio). Under purpose, judicial (iudicialis) and 'related to affairs' (negotialis). Under judicial, abso- lute (absoluta) and extraneous (adsumptiva). Under extraneous: concession (concessio), setting aside the charge (remotio criminis), retorting to the charge (rela- tio criminis), compensation (compensatio). Under con- cession, self-justification (purgatio) and plea for indul- gence (deprecatio). 3. The conjectural (coniecturalis) state obtains when an action alleged by one side is flatly denied by the other. The state is definitive (definitivus) when that which is alleged is not argued to exist as such, but what it may be is proved by means of the definitions employed.
The state 'quality' (qualitas) obtains when 'what sort of ' (qualis) matter may be in hand is considered; because it deals with controversy concerning the force and class (genus) of the affair, this proceeding (constitutio) is called 'general' (generalis). 4. Transference (translatio) obtains when a case hangs on this: either that the proper person is not bringing the charge, or that it is not being brought before the proper people, or that the time, the law, the charge, or the penalty is inappropriate. That proceeding is 'transferent' because the suit seems to be in need of transference and change. 5.A judicial (iudicialis) state is that in which is investigated the nature of what is fair and right, and the recompense or the rationale for the punishment. That state is 'related to affairs' (negotialis) in which is considered the part of the law that has to do with established practice and equity between citizens. The extraneous (adsumptivus) state is that which offers nothing firm of itself against an objection, [but takes to itself (adsumere) some defense from outside]. 6. Conces- sion (concessio) obtains when the accused does not offer a defense concerning what has been done, but asks for it to be forgiven. We have ourselves commended this in the case of penitents. 'Setting aside the charge' (remotio) occurs when a defendant makes every effort to displace onto some other person a crime caused by himself and his own fault.
7. 'Retorting to the charge' (relatio criminis) occurs when the deed is declared justly done because some- one was provoked beforehand by an injustice. Compar- ison (comparatio) occurs when some deed of another person is argued to be proper and useful, because as that deed happened, so this deed at issue is said to have been committed. 8. Purgation (purgatio) obtains when, although the deed is admitted, the liability is set aside. This has three types: imprudence, accident, necessity (inprudentia, casus, necessitas). The 'plea for indulgence' (deprecatio) occurs when the defendant admits to hav- ing done wrong, and having done wrong deliberately, and yet he requests that he be forgiven. This type very seldom occurs.
9. Then from state of 'appeal to the law' (legalis) these types emerge, that is: 'written law and its intention'
(scriptum et voluntas), contradictory laws (leges con- trariae), ambiguity (ambiguitas), inference or logical reasoning (collectio sive ratiocinatio), and legal defini- tion (definitio). The argument 'what is written and its intention' is used when the words themselves seem to be at variance with the thought of the writer. The argu- ment of 'contradictory laws' operates when two or more laws are recognized as contradictory. 'Ambiguity' occurs when what is written seems to mean two or more things. The argument by 'inference or logical reasoning' is used when, from what is written, another thing that is not written is deduced. 'Legal definition' obtains when one investigates the meaning it has in the specific point of dispute in which it is found.
10. The types of argument, then, rational and legal together, are reckoned by some quite definitely as eigh- teen. But according to Cicero on rhetoric (On Inven- tion 1.8) there are nineteen, because he locates 'transfer- ence' (translatio) chiefly among the 'rational' arguments. Yet even Cicero, refuting himself, includes 'transference' among the legal arguments.
vi. The tripartite dispute (De tripertita controversia)
1. According to Cicero, a tripartite dispute is either simple or conjunct (iunctus). If conjunct, it should be consid- ered whether it is a conjunction of several questions, orof some comparison. That dispute is simple which presents a single unqualified question, thus: "Should we declare war on Corinth or not?" 2. A dispute is conjoint of sev- eral questions, in which several things are queried, in this way: "Should Carthage be demolished, or rather given back to the Carthaginians, or rather should a colony be planted there?" A dispute is conjunct by way of compar- ison when one queries what is better or best to do, in this fashion: "Should the army be sent into Macedonia against Philip, so that it might help our allies, or rather be retained in Italy, so that there may be the greatest strength against Hannibal?"
vii. The four parts of an oration (De quattuor partibus orationis) 1. In rhetoric there are four parts of an oration (oratio): the exordium (exordium), the nar- rative (narratio), the argumentation (argumentatio), the conclusion (conclusio). The first of these elicits the atten- tion of the listener, the second lays out the facts, the third establishes trust in what is asserted, the fourth completes the end of the whole oration. 2. One ought to begin so
as to render the listener benevolent, docile, or attentive: benevolent by entreaty, docile by instruction, attentive by stimulation. In the narrative we should speak briefly and candidly. The argumentation should first confirm our own position, and then demolish the adversary view. The conclusion should incite the listeners' hearts to carry out what we say.
viii. The five types of cases (De quinque modis causarum) 1. There are five kinds of cases: honor- able, surprising, humble, doubtful, obscure (honestus, admirabilis, humilis, anceps, obscurus). The honorable type of case is that in which the mind of the listener is immediately, without our oration, well-disposed. The surprising, in which the inclinations of those who are about to hear are on the other side. The humble, to which the listener pays little attention. 2. The doubtful, in which either the judgment is doubtful, or a case is of partly decent and partly wicked matters, so that it arouses both benevolence and offense. The obscure, in which either the listeners are slow-witted, or the case is perceived to be tied up in matters that are rather hard to understand.
ix. Syllogisms (De syllogismis) 1. The Greek term 'syl- logism' (syllogismus) is called 'argumentation' (argu- mentatio) in Latin. 'Argumentation' is so called as if it were the speech of a 'clear mind' (arguta mens), with which we follow through toa probable discovery.A syl- logism therefore is the final conclusion (conclusio) of a proposition and an additional proposition and a demon- stration, either from the uncertainty of someone disput- ing, or the assurance of someone proving. 2. Hence a syllogism consists of three parts: proposition (proposi- tio, i.e. the major premise), the additional proposition (assumptio, i.e. the minor premise), and the conclusion (conclusio). The major premise, for example: "What is good cannot have a bad use." The listener grants it. He 'adds a minor premise' (adsumere): "Money has a bad use." It is concluded (concludere), "Therefore money is not good."
3. Not only rhetoricians, but especially logicians use syllogisms, although the apostle Paul often puts forth major and minor premises and confirms with a conclu- sion - which things, as we have said, belong properly to the disciplines of logic and rhetoric. 4. Among rhetori- cians the main kinds of syllogisms are two: induction
(inductio) and inference (ratiocinatio). The parts of induction are three: first the proposition (i.e. the major premise); second the 'thing brought in' (illatio, from inferre, "infer"), also called the 'additional proposition' (assumptio, i.e. the minor premise); third the conclusion.
5. Induction is that which in matters not liable to doubt demands assent when it is carried out, among philoso- phers or rhetoricians or people conversing. The major premise of an induction introduces (inducere) paral- lels, in one or more aspects, to the matter that must be granted. 6. The 'thing brought in' of an induction, also called the minor premise, is that which introduces the matter in dispute for whose sake the parallels were used. The conclusion of an induction is that which either confirms what is granted in the minor premise, or states what may be deduced from it.
Inference (ratiocinatio) is a discourse by which what is in question is put to the test. 7. There are two types of inference. First is the enthymeme (enthymema), which is an incomplete syllogism, and used in rhetoric. The second is the epichireme (epichirema), an unrhetorical, broader syllogism. 8. Hence 'enthymeme' is translated into Latin 'conception of the mind' (conceptio mentis), and writers on the art usually call it an incomplete syl- logism, because its form of argument consists of two parts, as it employs what aims to arouse conviction while bypassing the rule of syllogisms. For example: "If the storm is to be avoided, therefore one ought not sail." Thus the argument is completed from the major premise and the conclusion alone, whence it is considered more appropriate for orators than logicians.
9. There are five branches of enthymeme: first the convincing, second the demonstrating, third the sen- tentious, fourth the exemplifying, and fifth the collective (convincibilis, ostentabilis, sententialis, exemplabilis, col- lectivus). 10. The convincing is that which convinces by manifest reason, as Cicero did in his Defense of Milo (79): "Therefore you are sitting as avengers of the death of a man whose life you would not be willing to restore, even if you thought you could." 11. The demonstrating is that which exerts control by means of an indisputable depic- tion (demonstratio) of the defendant, as Cicero in the Catiline Oration (1.2): "Still he lives; nay, he even comes into the senate." The sententious is that which a general maxim (sententia) adduces, as in Terence (Andria 68):
Flattery breeds friends; truth, hatred.
12. 
The exemplifying is that which compares some other situation (exemplum), and by this means threatens that the outcome will be similar, as Cicero says in his Philip- pics (2.1): "I wonder, Antonius, that you do not trem- ble at the fates of those whose example you imitate."
13. The collective enthymeme collects (colligere, ppl. col- lectus) what has been argued into one, as Cicero says in his Defense of Milo (41): "Was he then willing to do, irritating some, what he was not willing to do with the gratitude of all? Did he have no hesitation in killing law- lessly, at an unpropitious place and time, risking his neck, a man he did not venture to kill with impunity, with the law, the place, and the time on his side?"
14. Moreover there is another definition of the enthymeme, according to (Marius) Victorinus: from the major premise (propositio) alone, as has already been said, which is composed thus: "If the storm is to be avoided, one should not seek to sail." 15. Or from the minor premise (assumptio) alone, as this: "If he is an enemy, he slays; moreover he [is] an enemy." Because the conclusion is lacking here, it is called an enthymeme.
16. Next is the epichireme, deriving from inference as broader and more developed than rhetorical syllogisms, distinct in breadth and in length of utterance from logi- cal syllogisms, for which reason it is given to the rhetori- cians. This consists of three types: the first, of three parts; the second, of four parts; the third, of five parts.
17. The three-part epichirematic syllogism consists of three members: the major premise (propositio), minor premise (assumptio), and conclusion (conclusio). The four-part type consists of four members: first the major premise, second the minor premise joined to the major premise or a minor premise, third the proof (probatio), and the conclusion.5 18. The five-part type accordingly has five members: first the major premise, second its proof, third the minor premise, fourth its proof, fifth the conclusion. Cicero puts it thus in his art of rhetoric (On Invention 1.9): "If deliberation (deliberatio) and demon- stration (demonstratio) are kinds of arguments (causa), they cannot rightly be considered parts of any one kind of argument - for the same thing can be a kind of one thing and part of another, but not a kind and a part of
the same thing," and so forth, up to the point where the constituents of this syllogism are concluded.
x. Law (De lege) 1. Law (lex) is the ordinance (constitutio) of the people, which the elders have solemnly ratified with the common people. What a king or emperor proclaims (edicere), is called an ordinance (constitutio) or edict (edictum). The basis of fairness (aequitas) is twofold, sometimes in laws, sometimes in custom (mores). Between law and custom there is this difference, that law is written, while custom is usage (consuetudo) tested and found good by its antiquity, or unwritten law. Indeed, law (lex) is so named from 'read- ing' (legere), because it is written. 2. Custom (mos) is longstanding usage, taken likewise from 'moral habits' (mores, the plural of mos). 'Customary law' (consuetudo) moreover is a certain system of justice (ius), established by moral habits, which is received as law when law is lacking; nor does it matter whether it exists in writing or in reason, seeing that reason commends a law. 3. Indeed if law amounts to reason (ratio), the law will consist of everything that already agrees with reason, provided that it accords with religion, befits orderly conduct, and profits welfare. Customary law is so called because it is in 'common use' (communis usus).
4. Every law either permits something, as "a valiant man may seek his reward," or it forbids, as "it is not permitted to marry a sacred virgin," or it punishes, as "he who commits murder will undergo capital punishment."
5. Moreover laws are made so that human audacity may be controlled by fear of them, and that innocence may be protected among the wicked, and that among the wicked themselves the power of harming may be reined in by the fear of punishment - for by the rewards and punishments of the law, human life is governed. 6. A law will be decent, just, enforceable, natural, in keeping with the custom of the country, appropriate to the place and time, needful, useful, and also clear - so that it does not hold anything that can deceive through obscurity - and for no private benefit, but for the common profit (communis utilitas) of the citizens.
xi. The maxim (De sententia) 1. A maxim (sententia) is an impersonal saying, as (Terence, Andria 68):
Flattery breeds friends; truth, hatred.
If a person were added to this, it would be a chreia (chria), thus: "Achilles offended Agamemnon by speaking the truth" or "Metrophanes earned the favor of Mithridates by flattering him." 2. For between chreia and maxim is this distinction, that a maxim is uttered without a per- son, and a chreia is never said without a person. Whence if a person is added to a maxim, it becomes a chreia; if the person is taken away, it becomes a maxim.
xii. Confirmation and refutation (De catasceva et anasceva) 1.A confirmation (catasceva) is a corrobora- tion of the thing proposed, while a refutation (anasceva) is the contrary of the above, for it refutes the possibility that something proposed as having beenborn or made or said exists or ever existed. It is as if, for example, someone should deny that a Chimaera existed, or confirm that it existed. 2. Between these arguments and a thesis (thesis) is this difference, that a thesis, although it also may enter debate on either side, nevertheless is a kind of pondering or urging about an uncertain matter. Further, confirma- tions and refutations mostly engage in those matters that are improbable, but that are put forward as truths.
3. The first division of the refutation is the inappropri- ate (inconveniens) and the lie (mendacium). The species of the inappropriate are the indecent and the useless. Again the indecent is treated either in words or deeds. In words, when someone is said to have used words that are ugly and not appropriate to someone's authority, as if someone were to defame Cato the Censor himself as having incited young people to wickedness and lechery.
4. In deeds, as if someone were said to have done some- thing inappropriate to piety and his own good name, as is the fable of the adultery of Mars and Venus.
The lie (mendacium) has three kinds. The incredible lie, inwhich something is not believed to have been done, as the youth who, standing on the Sicilian shore, saw the fleet approach Africa. 5. The impossible lie, as Clodius laid a trap for Milo and was killed by Milo. This isa con- tradiction, for if he laid a trap, he killed. He was killed; he did not lay a trap. This pattern reworked into its contrary would be an effective confirmation (catasceva). [We may set down as all the gradations the decent, the useful, the likely, the possible, the consistent, or conversely the inde- cent, the useless, the insufficiently likely, the impossible, the contradictory.] It will be fitting nevertheless so to arrange our principles that we say either that one ought to believe in the authority of the ancients, or that faith
in fables is not to be maintained. 6. And with regard to this last, by way of refutation (anasceva) we should ask whether they who concocted those things did not wish to mean something else, as that Scylla lived not as a sea-hag, but as a seaside-dwelling woman, not girded by dogs, but as someone rapacious and inhospitable to visitors.
xiii. Prosopopoeia (De prosopoeia) 1. Prosopopoeia occurs when personality and speech are invented for inanimate things. Cicero in the Catiline Oration (1.27): "If, in truth, my fatherland, which is far dearer to me than my life, were to speak with me, saying," etc. 2. Thus we bring in speaking mountains and rivers or trees, impos- ing personhood on a thing that does not have the capac- ity for speech. This is common in tragedies and found very frequently in orations.
xiv. Ethopoeia (De ethopoeia) 1. We call that 'ethopoeia' whereby we represent the character of a per- son in such a way as to express traits related to age, occu- pation, fortune, happiness, gender, grief, boldness. Thus when the character of a pirate is taken up, the speech will be bold, abrupt, rash; when the speech of a woman is imitated, the oration ought to fit her sex. A distinct way of speaking ought to be used for young and old, soldier and general, parasite and rustic and philosopher. 2. One caught up in joy speaks one way, one wounded, another. In this genre of speech these things should be most fully thought out: who speaks and with whom, about whom, where, and when, what one has done or will do, or what one can suffer if one neglects these decrees.
xv. Kinds of questions (De generibus quaestionum)
1. There are two kinds of questions, of which one is the finite (finitus), the other the indefinite (infinitus). The finite is úpó9?otç in Greek, called 'case' (causa) in Latin, where there is controversy with a particular per- son. 2. The indefinite is called 9sotç in Greek, 'proposi- tion' (propositum) in Latin. This concerns no particular person, nor is there in it any particular circumstance, that is, neither place nor time. In a case (causa) every- thing is particular, whence a proposition is as it were a part of a case. 
xvi. Style (De elocutione) 1. With regard to style (elocutio) it will be correct to use what the matter, the
place, the time, and the character of the audience require, ensuring that profane things are not be mingled with religious, immodest with chaste, frivolous with weighty, playful with earnest, or laughable with sad. 2. One ought to speak in good Latin, and clearly, for he speaks in good Latin who persistently seeks the true and natural words for things, nor does he diverge from the speech and cul- ture of the present time. It is not enough for such a man to watch what he says, unless he says it openly and smoothly; and more than that, his actions must match his words.
xvii. The three registers of speaking (De trimodo dicendi genere) 1. One ought to speak of humble things softly, of dramatic matters emphatically, of varied mat- ters moderately. Indeed, these are the familiar three reg- isters (genus) of speaking: humble, middling, grandilo- quent (humilis, medius, grandiloquus). Now when we say great things, they should be uttered grandly; when we speak of small things, delicately; when things of the mid- dling sort, temperately. 2. For in small causes nothing should be spoken grandly or loftily, but one should speak in a simple and ordinary manner. But in greater causes, where we deal with God or human salvation, more mag- nificence and brilliance should be displayed. 3. In mod- erate causes, where nothing is treated in order to effect an action, but only that the audience may be pleased, one should speak with moderation, somewhere between the two. But even though someone may speak of great things, nevertheless he should not always teach (var. dicere, "speak") grandly, but humbly, when he teaches; mod- erately, when he praises or chastises something; grandly, when he calls to conversion minds that are turned away. In the humble style adequate words should be used; in the middling, showy; in the grand, ardent.
xviii. Clause, phrase, and sentence (De colo, commate, et periodis) 1. Every utterance is composed and consti- tuted of words, the phrase, the clause, and the sentence. A phrase (comma) is a small component of thought, a clause (colon) is a member, and a sentence (periodos) is a 'rounding-off or compass' (ambitus vel circuitus; cf. p?p(c)o6oç, "going round"). A phrase is made from a com- bination of words, a clause from phrases, and a sentence
from clauses. 2.A comma is the marking off of a speech- juncture, as (cf. Cicero, Defense of Milo 1): "Although I fear, judges, . . ." - there is one comma, and another comma follows - ". . . that it may be unseemly to speak for the bravest of men, . . ." and this makes up a clause (colon), that is, a member, that makes the sense intelligi- ble. But still the utterance is left hanging, and in this way finally from several clauses the sentence's period (perio- dos) is made, that is the last closing-off of the thought, thus: ". . . and so they miss the traditional procedure of the courts." But a sentence should not be longer than what may be delivered in one breath.
xix. Faults to be avoided in letters, words, and expres- sions (De vitiis litterarum et verborum et senten- tiarum cavendis) 1. Again, the pure and chaste speech of an orator should be without all faults, as much in let- ters as in words, and indeed in expressions (sententia).
2. In letters, their adjoining should be apt and proper, and thus care must be taken to ensure that the final vowel of the preceding word is not the same as the ini- tial vowel of the following word, as feminae Aegyptiae ("of an Egyptian woman"). This construction would be better if consonants were adjoined to the vowels. One should also avoid the adjoining of the three consonants which coming together seem to be grating and as it were to clash, that is r, s, and x, as: ars studiorum ("the art of study"), rex Xerxes ("King Xerxes"), error Romuli ("the wandering of Romulus"). Also to be avoided is the con- sonant m dashing against vowels, as verum enim ("but indeed").
xx. Combinations of words (De iuncturis verborum)
1. Also we should be wary of faults in words, so that we don't position words improperly, which the Greeks call acyrologia. Therefore propriety should be cherished, so that sometimes because of the meanness of a foul and nasty word one should use terms in a transferred sense, yet not fetched from far away, but such as seem neighbors and cognates to the true ones. 2. Very far-fetched hyper- batons (see I.xxxvii.16), which cannot be employed with- out confusion with other meanings, should be avoided. Ambiguity (ambiguitas) is also to be avoided, as well
as that fault when, carried away by the excitement of oratory, some people conclude, in a long and round- about rambling (ambages) with empty sounds inter- posed, what they could have expressed in one or two words. Thisfault is called perissologia. 3. To this the oppo- site guilty fault is to rob the speech of even essential words in one's zeal for brevity. To be avoided also are the faults of expressions (sententia) as well as those of letters and words; these are recognized as among the first studies of grammarians. 4. These are cacemphaton, tautologia, ellipsis, acyrologia, macrologia, perissologia, pleonasm, and ones like these. But contrariwise enargeia (energia) as well as emphasis, which causes something to be under- stood beyond what one has said, elevate and adorn an oration, as if you were to say, "He rises to the glory of Scipio," and Vergil (Aen. 2.262):
Sliding down the lowered rope.
For when he says 'sliding down' he suggests the image of height. To this the opposite virtue is to diminish in one's words things that are in their nature great.
xxi. Figures of words and of expressions (De figuris verborum et sententiarum) 1. A speech is amplified and adorned with figures of words and of expressions. Because a straight and continuous oration makes for weariness and disgust as much for the speaker as for the hearer, it should be inflected and varied into other forms, so that it might refresh the speaker and become more elaborate, and deflect criticism with a diversity of presentation and hearing. Of these figures most, from Donatus, have been noted above in the schemes of the art of grammar. 2. Hence here it is fitting to insert only those that never or with difficulty occur in poetry, but freely in oratory. 
3. [Anadiplosis is a doubling of words, as (Cicero, Cati- line Oration 1.2): "Still he lives. Lives! He even comes into the Senate!" 4. Climax (climax) is an 'ascending series' (gradatio), when the second notion begins at the point where the first leaves off, and from here as if in steps (gradus) the order of speech is managed, as in the speech of Africanus: "From innocence arises esteem; from esteem, preferment; from preferment, sovereignty; from sovereignty, liberty." Some call this figure the 'chain' (catena), because one term is as it were linked to another, and in this way more ideas are conveyed in the doubling of the words. Moreover, this scheme
occurs not only in single words, but also in the grouping of words, as this from (Sempronius) Gracchus (fr. 43): "Your boyhood was a dishonor to your youth, your youth the disgrace of your old age, your old age the scandal of the state." And likewise from Scipio (Africanus Minor, fr. 33): "By force and unwillingly compelled, I made a pact with him; when the pact was made, I brought him before the judge; when he was brought, I condemned him in the first assembly; when he was condemned, I discharged him willingly."
5. Antitheses (antitheton) are called 'oppositions' (contrapositum) in Latin. When these are set in oppo- sition they make for beauty of expression, and among the ornaments of speech they remain the most lovely, as Cicero (Catiline Oration 2.25): "On this side shame does battle; on that, impudence; here modesty, there debauchery; here faith, there deceit; here piety, there wickedness; here steadiness, there rage; here decency, there foulness; here restraint, there lust; here in short equity, temperance, courage, wisdom, all the virtues struggle with iniquity, dissipation, cowardice, foolhardi- ness - with all the vices. Finally wealth struggles against poverty, right thinking against depravity, sanity against madness - in sum, good hope against desperation in every circumstance." In strife and battle of this kind the book of Ecclesiasticus used the ornament of this type of locution, saying (cf. 33:15): "Good is set against evil, and life against death; so also is the sinner against a just man. And so look upon all the works of the most High. Two and two, and one against another."
6. Synonymy (synonymia) occurs whenever in con- nected speech we signify one thing with several words, as Cicero puts it (Catiline Oration 1.8): "You do noth- ing, you attempt nothing, you think of nothing." Again (Catiline Oration 1.10): "I will not bear it, I will not toler- ate it,I will not permit it." 7. Epanodos, which our gram- marians call 'regression' (regressio) (Cicero, Defense of Ligarius 19): "The dignity of the first ones was almost equal; not the equal, perhaps, of those that followed." 8. Antapodosis, whenever the middle terms agree with the first and the last, [as is] (Cicero, Against the Speech of Metellus, fr. 5): "Yours is this deed I now reprove, sena- tors, not mine - granted a most lovely deed - but, as I have said, not mine, but yours."
9. Paradiastole occurs whenever we make distinctions by way of explanatory definition (cf. Rutilius Lupus, Schemata Lexeos 1.4): "While you call yourself wise
instead of cunning, brave instead of reckless, thrifty instead of stingy." 10. Antanaclasis is that which expresses a contrary sense with the same word. A certain man was complaining about his son because he was 'look- ing forward' (exspectare) to his death, and the son answered, "I don't look forward (exspectare) to it; nay I wish," he said, "that you would dread (exspectare) it."
11. Antimetabole is an inversion of words that makes a contrary sense when their order is changed: "I don't live to eat, but I eat to live." And this (Cicero, Philippics 4.8): "If Antony is consul, then is Brutus the enemy; if the savior of the republic is Brutus, the enemy is Antony."
12. The figure exoche (Cicero, Defense of Milo 59): "Who called them? Appius. Who brought them forth? Appius."
13. Now let us examine the 'figures of thought' (figura sententiae), which are worth the effort to know. 14. A maxim (sententia) is an impersonal saying, as (Terence, Andria 68)
Flattery breeds friends, truth hatred.
If a person were added to this, it would be a chreia (chria), thus: "Achilles offended Agamemnon by speaking the truth" or "Metrophanes earned the favor of Mithridates by flattering him." Between a chreia and a maxim is this distinction, that a maxim is produced without a person, but a chreia is never spoken without a person. Whence if a person is added to a maxim, it becomes a chreia; if taken away, it becomes a maxim.
15. There are many kinds of sentences (sententia). Some are indicative (indicativus), some proclamatory (pronuntiativus), as (Vergil, Aen. 4.373):
Faith is nowhere secure.
Some are imperative (imperativus), as (Vergil, Aen.
4.223):
Go and take action, son; call the west winds, and glide on your wings.
Some wondering (admirativus) (Aen. 1.11):
Does such great wrath possess divine minds?
16. Some comparative (comparativus) (anon., Courtney fr. 1):
If I conquer and die, what good is it for me to conquer?
Some superlative (superlativus), which are uttered with some emotion and indignation (Aen. 3.56):
To what, cursed hunger for gold, will you not drive mortal hearts?
17. Some interrogative (interrogativus), [as] (Aen. 8.112):
Young men, what cause drove you to try unknown ways? . . . What is your race, where is your home? Do you bring here peace, or war?
18. Others as a reply (responsivus), as: "From over there," or "From there." Some prayerful (deprecativus), as (Aen. 6.365):
Invincible one, snatch me from these evils!
Some promising (promissivus), as (Aen. 1.257):
Forgo fear, the fates of your children remain secure.
Some concessive (concessivus), which would inhibit by urging, as (Aen. 4.381):
Go, pursue Italy on the winds, seek your kingdom across the waves.
These concessive sayings, lest their prompting not be understood, are mixed with some things that unobtru- sively inhibit, as "on the winds," "across the waves."
Some demonstrative (demonstrativus), as: "There!" or "Behold!" Some optative (optativus), as (Aen. 8.560):
O that Jupiter would bring me back bygone years.
19. Some derogatory (derogativus), as: "By no means." Some, which are uttered with an exclamation (exclama- tio), as (Petronius, Satyricon 108):
What madness, o citizens, changes peace into arms?
And Cicero (Catiline Oration 1.9): "O immortal gods, where among the nations are we?" 20. Some hortatory (exhortativus), when we incite toward an idea, as (Aen. 8.364):
Dare, guest, to spurn wealth.
21. Some dissuasive (dehortativus), when we draw back from an opposing vice and sin. 22. And some affirmative (affirmativus), as: "Why not," or "Indeed." Some are preceptive (praeceptivus), as (cf. Vergil, Geo. 1.299):
Naked plow, sow naked, and you will have your crop in the cold.
23. Prohibiting (vetativus), as (Geo. 2.299):
Neither sow hazel among the vines, nor reach for the highest shoots.
24. Negative (negativus), as: "No," "Not at all." And there are wondering (mirativus) sentences, as (Jerome, Epistle 25, to Rusticus 15 (PL 22.1080)): "What! I can scarcely survive; would I wish to fornicate?" 25. Some sentences are of one grieving (dolens), as (cf. Ovid, Heroides 5.149):
Woe is me, that no love is curable with herbs.
Some of one weeping (flens), [as]. . . Some express a similitude (similitudo), thus (Vergil, Aen. 5.588):
As once the Labyrinth, they say, in high Crete.
There are sentences of one warning (admonens), one laughing (inridens), one moaning (gemens). There are hortatory (exhortativus) sentences, consoling (consola- tivus) sentences, those of one commiserating (commis- erans). Of these sentences, as many as there are figures, so many are the tones of voice in uttering them.
26. There are 'double-edged statements' (amphidoxa), conferring partly honor, partly dishonor, as (Ovid, Met. 2.53):
Your desire is not safe: you seek great things, Phaeton.
27. And there are others: procatalepsis, when we grant beforehand what can be objected against us in order to dilute its impact, as (Cicero, On Divination, Against Caecilius 1): "If any of you, judges, or of those who are present, perhaps are amazed." And there is aporia, the doubting (dubitatio) of one pretending not to know what he knows, or how he should say it. 28. Koenonosis is called one's 'sharing of counsel' (communicatio consilii) with one's judges or one's adversaries, as if you were to say: "I take counsel (consulere) with you, judges, or else with you, adversaries, about what action was suitable for me to take, or rather what you would have thought of doing."
29. Paradox (paradoxon) occurs when we say that something unexpected has happened, as Cicero in his Defense of Flaccus (cf. Pro Flacco 1): "He who ought to have been the singer of his praises has become the one who begs for his release from danger." 30. Epitrope, that is, yielding (permissio), when we yield up (permittere) some things to be evaluated by the judges or adversaries themselves, as Calvus in the Against Vatinius (Vati[ci]nio; i.e. In Vatinium, fr. 23): "Put on a bold face, and say that you are more worthy to become praetor than Cato."
31. Parrhesia is speech full of freedom and confidence (Cicero, Defense of Milo 72): "I have not slain Spurius Maelius," and so on. This figure should be used with caution, as did Cicero, for he explained his conduct beforehand. 32. Ethopoeia occurs when we introduce speech from an absent person, as Cicero in his Defense of Caelius (33-34) has Appius Caecus speaking with Clo- dia. 33. Enargeia (energia) is the performance of things acted out or as if they were acted out before our eyes, on which we have already spoken. 34. Metathesis is the figure that sends the thoughts of the judges toward past or future events, in this way: "Call your minds back to the spectacle of the defeated, wretched city, and imagine that you see the burning, the slaughter, the plundering, the pillage, the wounds on the bodies of children, the capture of wives, the butchering of elders." Or toward the future, as an anticipation of what the opponent is about to say, as by Cicero in his Defense of Milo (79), when he directs the thoughts of the judges toward that condition of the republic [which] will come to be even if, were Milo killed, Clodius should live.
35. Aposiopesis occurs when we break off what we seemed to be about to say with silence (Vergil, Aen. 1.135):
Whom I . . . but it is more important to settle the restless waves.
36. Epanalepsis is digression (digressio): "The heat of my argument and the importance of these matters has carried me off a little further than I wished, but I return to the case at hand." 37. Anamnesis is the recollection of a matter that we pretend to have forgotten. 38. Aparisis occurs when at an opportune moment we appeal to what we have as it were deposited beforehand in the minds of the judges. 
39. Etiology (aetiologia) occurs when we set forth something and give its cause and explanation.
40. 
Characterization (characterismus) is a detailed description of some figure, as (Vergil, Aen. 4.558):
In every way like Mercury, in voice and coloring and blond hair and handsome youthful limbs.
%9potoµóç occurs when people pile up in one place sev- eral thoughts, briefly set forth, and the speaker runs through them with some haste, as Cicero (Catiline Ora- tion 3.1): "The republic, citizens, and the lives of you all, your goods, fortunes, wives, and children," etc. 41. Irony (ironia) occurs when through a pretense someone wishes to be understood otherwise than he says. This is done either when we praise someone whom we wish to blame, or blame him whom we would praise. An exam- ple of each would be if you were to call Catiline a lover of the republic, or Scipio an enemy of the republic. 42. Diasyrmus diminishes in words things that are great, or magnifies very small things. 43. Efon occurs whenever we linger for a rather long time on the same thought: "Whom at last did he spare? Whose friendship did he keep in trust? To which good man was he not hostile? When did he not either accuse someone, or beat him, or betray him?" 
44. Epangelia is a 'promise' (promissio) by which we make the judge attentive, promising that we are about to say grand or very small things. 45. Personification (prosopopoeia) occurs when personality and speech are contrived for inanimate things. Cicero in the Catiline Oration (1.27): "If, in truth, my fatherland, which is far dearer to me than my life, were to speak with me, say- ing," etc. 46. Parathesis occurs when as it were we insert something incomplete into the memories of the judges, saying that we will return to it when the right moment comes. 47. Peusis, that is soliloquy (soliloquium), occurs when we ourselves answer our own questions. 48. Synaeresis occurs when we defer something, asking
that we may be permitted to say something else in the meanwhile.] 
xxii. Dialectic (De dialectica) 1. Dialectic (dialectica) is the discipline devised for investigating the causes of things. It is a branch of philosophy, and is called logic (logica), that is, the rational (rationalis) power of defin- ing, questioning, and discussing. Dialectic teaches, with regard to many types of questions, how the true and the false may be distinguished by disputation. 2. Some of the earliest philosophers had 'logic' among their terms, but they did not refine it to the level of skill of an art. After these, Aristotle brought the argumentative meth- ods of this discipline under certain rules and named it 'dialectic' (dialectica) because in it one disputes about terms (dictum), for 2?mtóv means "utterance" (dictio). Dialectic follows the discipline of rhetoric because they have many things in common.
xxiii. The difference between the arts of rhetoric and dialectic (De differentia dialecticae et rhetoricae artis)
1. Varro in his nine books of Disciplines defines dialec- tic and rhetoric with this similitude: "Dialectic and rhetoric are like the clenched fist and the open palm of a man's hand: the former pinches words, the latter extends them." 2. While dialectic is indeed sharper for exam- ining things, rhetoric is more fluent for those things it strives to teach. Dialectic sometimes appears in schools; rhetoric continually comes to the public forum. Dialec- tic reaches very few students; rhetoric often reaches the whole populace. 3. Before they come to explaining the Isagoge (see chapter xxv. below), philosophers custom- arily lay out a definition of philosophy, so that mat- ters that pertain to the Isagoge may be more readily set forth.
xxiv. The definition of philosophy (De definitione philosophiae) 1. Philosophy is the understanding of human and divine things joined with the pursuit of
living well. It seems to consist of two things: knowledge (scientia) and opinion (opinatio). 2. Knowledge obtains when some thing is perceived by sure reasoning; opinion, however, when an unsure thing still lies concealed and is grasped by no solid reasoning - for instance whether the sun is as large as it seems to be or is larger than the whole earth, or whether the moon is spherical or concave, or whether the stars are stuck to the sky or are carried through the air in a free course, or of what size and what material the heavens themselves may be, whether they are at rest and immobile or are whirling at unbelievable speed, or how thick the earth is, or on what foundation it endures balanced and suspended.
3. The name 'philosophy' itself in Latin translation professes the 'love of wisdom' (amor sapientiae), for the Greek ??t2o- means "love," and oo??(c)a means "wis- dom." There are three kinds of philosophy: one natu- ral (naturalis), which in Greek is 'physics' (physica), in which one discusses the investigation of nature; a sec- ond moral (moralis), which is called 'ethics' (ethica) in Greek, in which moral behavior is treated; a third ratio- nal (rationalis), which is named with the Greek term 'logic' (logica), in which there is disputation concerning how in the causes of things and in moral behavior the truth itself may be investigated. 4. Hence physics involves the cause of inquiring, ethics, the order of living, and logic, the rationale of knowing.
Among the Greeks the first who investigated physics deeply was Thales of Miletus, one of the Seven Sages. Indeed, he before anyone else examined the first princi- ples of the sky and the power of natural things with con- templative reason. Later Plato divided physics into four categories: arithmetic, geometry, music, and astronomy.
5. Socrates first established ethics for the correcting and settling of conduct, and directed his whole effort toward disputation about living well. He divided ethics into the four virtues of the soul, namely prudence, justice, for- titude, and temperance. 6. Prudence (prudentia) has to do with how the bad is distinguished from the good in affairs. Fortitude (fortitudo), how adversity may beborne with equanimity. Temperance (temperantia), how pas- sion and the desire for things may be reined in. Justice (iustitia), how to each is distributed his own by right judging.
7. Plato added logic, which is called rational philoso- phy. Through it, when the causes of things and conduct had been dissected, he scrutinized the essence of those
causes rationally, while dividing logic into rhetoric and dialectic. This philosophy is called logic, that is, the ratio- nal (rationalis), for 2óyoç in Greek means both 'utter- ance' (sermo) and 'reason' (ratio). 8. And indeed, divine eloquence (i.e. the Bible) likewise consists of these three branches of philosophy; it is likely to treat nature, as in Genesis and Ecclesiastes, or conduct, as in Proverbs and here and there in all the books, or logic - by virtue of which our (Christian) writers lay claim to the theory of interpretation (theoretica) for themselves, as in the Song of Songs and the Gospels. 9. Again some of the learned (i.e. Cassiodorus, Institutes 2.3.5) have defined philosophy in name and in its parts in this way: philos- ophy is the provable knowledge (probabilis scientia) of human and divine things, insofar as this is possible for a human. Otherwise: philosophy is the art of arts and the discipline of disciplines. Again: philosophy is a medita- tion on death, a definition more suitable for Christians who, with worldly ambition trod under heel, and a dis- ciplined way of life, live out the likeness of their future homeland.
Philosophy is divided into two parts, the first specula- tive (inspectivus), the second practical (actualis). 10. Oth- ers have defined the method of philosophy as consisting of two parts, of which the first is speculative, the second practical. The speculative is divided into three types: first natural (naturalis), second doctrinal (doctrinalis), third divine (divinus). Doctrinal is divided into four, that is, first arithmetic, second music, third geometry, fourth astronomy. 11. Practical philosophy is divided into three, that is, first moral (moralis), second economic (dispen- sativus), third civil (civilis).
That branch of philosophy is called speculative (inspectivus) by which, having passed beyond visible things, we contemplate in some measure concerning divine and heavenly things, and we investigate those things by the mind alone because they pass beyond the corporeal gaze. 12. Philosophy is called natural when the nature (natura) of each individual thing is examined, for nothing is generated (generare) in life, but rather each thing is classified by those properties according to which the Creator defined it, unless perhaps by the will of God some miracle is shown to occur. 
13. Philosophy is called divine when we treat of the ineffable nature of God or creatures that are spiritual in some respect, the most profound questions with regard to quality. 14. Doctrinal philosophy is the science
that studies abstract quantity, for that quantity is called abstract which we treat with pure reason, separating it by the intellect from matter or from other accidental qualities - as are even and odd - or from things of this kind. It has four branches: arithmetic, geometry, music, astronomy. 15. Arithmetic is the discipline of numerable quantity in itself. Geometry is the discipline of unmov- ing size and of shapes. Music is the discipline that speaks of numbers that inhere in something, namely those that are found in sounds. Astronomy is the discipline that contemplates all the courses of the heavenly bodies and the figures of the constellations, and with searching rea- son discourses on the habitual movements of the stars around one another and around the earth.
16. Further, that branch of philosophy is called practi- cal (actualis) that explains in their own workings things that are proposed. It has three parts: moral, economic, and civil. That philosophy is called moral (moralis) through which we seek a decent conduct of life, and set up principles aiming toward virtue. That philosophy is called economic (dispensativus) wherein the ordering of domestic affairs is wisely disposed. That philosophy is called civil (civilis) through which the welfare of the whole state is attended to.
xxv. Porphyry's Isagoge (De Isagogis Porphyrii) 1. After these definitions of philosophy, in which every- thing is contained generally, now let us set forth Porphyry's Isagoge. 'Isagoge' (Isagoga) is a Greek word, in Latin 'introduction' (introductio), specifically for those who are beginning philosophy. It contains in itself a demonstration of the first principles of any thing as to what it may be, and the thing is explained with its own solid and substantial definition. 2. First we posit
the genus, then we subjoin the species and other things that can be allied, and we separate them by particulars they hold in common, continually introducing the dif- ferentiae until we arrive at the individual character (pro- prium) of the thing whose identifying properties we have been investigating by means of a definition that marks it out. For example: A human being is an animal, rational, mortal, land-dwelling, bipedal, capable of laughter.
3. When the genus is called animal, the substance (sub- stantia) of a human being is set forth. Now a human being is of the 'animal' genus, but because this spreads a wide net, the species is added, 'land-dwelling': now that which is [supposed to be] of the air or of the water is excluded. The differentia then, as 'bipedal,' which is posited as against animals that are supported by many feet. Again 'rational,' as against those which lack reason; 'mortal' too, as against that which is [not] an angel. 4. Afterwards, to these distinctions and exclusions is added the individual trait (proprium) in the last place, ['capable of laughter'] - for it is characteristic of a human being alone that he laughs. Thus is completed in every respect the definition for setting forth 'human being.' Aristotle and Cicero thought that a full definition in this discipline consisted of genera and differentiae. 5. Afterwards some, fuller in their teaching about this, divide the complete definition of substance into five parts as their branches. Of these the first concerns the genus, the second the species, the third the differentia, the fourth the individ- ual trait, the fifth the accidental property (accidens).
6. Genus, as 'animal,' for that is the generic (generale) and common term for all things having a soul (anima). Species, as 'human being,' for that is the 'specific prop- erty' (specialitas), by which he is separated from other animate things. Differentiae, as 'rational,' 'mortal.' In these two differentiae a human being differs from oth- ers. 7. When he is called 'a rational being,' he is distin- guished from irrational, speechless animals that do not have reason. When [he is called] 'a mortal being,' he is distinguished from angels, who do not know death. Indi- vidual trait, as 'capable of laughter,' for it is the human being who laughs, and except for the human being this is true of no animal. Accidental property, as color in the body, learning in the mind. 8. These things both
occur (accidere) and change with variation over time. From all these five parts we have the expression of the full thought, thus: "Man is an animal, rational, mortal, capable of laughter, capable of good and evil." Hence in every discourse about substance we ought to include species and differentiae until, when all things that could be the same thing are excluded, we may attain the object, so that its individual nature (proprietas) may now be held fixed.
9. Victorinus the orator translated the Isagoge from Greek into Latin, and Boethius produced his commen- tary on it in five books. 
xxvi. Aristotle's categories (De categoriis Aristotelis)
1. We come to the categories (categoria) of Aristotle, which in Latin are called 'predications' (praedicamen- tum). With these every form of discourse is included in accordance with their various significations. 2. The instruments (instrumentum) of the categories are three: the first is equivocal (aequivocus), the second univo- cal (univocus), the third denominative (denominativus). They are equivocal when many things possess the same name, but not the same definition, as 'lion' - for with regard to the name, the actual, the painted, and the zodi- acal lion are called 'lion'; with regard to the definition, the actual is defined one way, the painted another, the zodiacal another. 3. The instruments are univocal when two or more things share a single name and a single definition, as 'clothing.' Thus both a cloak and a tunic can take the name 'clothing' along with its definition. Therefore this is understood to be univocal among the types of instruments, because it gives both a name and a definition to its forms. 4. We call denominative, that is 'derivative' (derivativus), whichever instruments take their name from some single instance of differentiation withregardtoanoun, as 'good' from'goodness,''wicked' from 'wickedness.'
5. There are ten species of categories: substance, quantity, quality, relation, situation, place, time, habit, activity, and passivity (substantia, quantitas, qualitas, relatio, situs, locus, tempus, habitus, agere, pati). 6. 'Sub- stance' is what a thing properly and principally is called, which is neither predicated of the subject, nor inheres in the subject, as 'some particular man' or 'some par- ticular horse.' In addition, there are things called 'sec- ondary substances' (secunda substantia), in which types those things that were just now called substances in the
principal sense are present and included, as the principal substance 'Cicero' is included in the secondary substance 'man.' 7. 'Quantity' is the measure by which something is shown to be large or small, as 'long,' 'short.' 'Qual- ity' expresses 'of what sort' (qualis) a person may be, as 'orator' or 'peasant,' 'black' or 'white.' 'Relation' is what is 'related' (referre, ppl. relatus) to something, for when 'son' is said, 'father' is also indicated. These things arise together as related (relativa). Indeed, 'slave' and 'master' have a simultaneous onset of the name, nor can a master sometimes be found before a slave, nor a slave before a master, for one cannot exist before the other.
8. 'Place' is where a thing is: in the forum, in a street. Further, movement of place has six directions: right and left, forward and back, up and down. Also those six direc- tions have two aspects, [that is, situation and time. 'Sit- uation,' as] 'far' and 'near.' 'Time,' as 'yesterday,' 'today.' Moreover 'situation' (situs) is so called from 'position' (positio), as someone may stand, or sit, or lie down.
9. 'Habit' (habitus) is so called from 'having' (habere) something - as to 'have' knowledge in the mind, strength in the body, clothing around the body, and the other things that fall under this mode of having, with their number assigned by the learned. 10. Now 'activity' and 'passivity' are functions of the sense that one is acting or receiving the action. So 'I write' is in the active voice, because it indicates the situation of one doing; 'I am written' is passive, because it indicates that one receives the action.
Countless things are classified in these nine types, of which we have presented some as examples, or in the type 'substance' itself, which is oùo(c)a ("essential being"). It is also the case with whatever we perceive with the intellect: we present them in speech with one or another of these ten predicates. 11. A sentence full of these runs like this: "Augustine, the great orator, the son of that man, standing, in the temple, today, wearing a priest's fillet, is worn out from arguing."
Further, 'being' (usia) is 'substance' (substantia) that is, the 'essential property' (proprium) that underlies (subiacere) the other categories; the remaining nine are accidents. 'Substance' is so called because every thing subsists (subsistere) with reference to itself. A body sub- sists, and therefore is a substance. 12. Those accidents, indeed, which are in the subsisting thing and in the subject are not substances, because they do not remain
(subsistere) but are changed, such as color or shape. 13. The terms 'of the subject' (de subiecto) and 'in the sub- ject' (in subiecto) amount as it were to 'of the thing itself' and 'in the thing itself.' Thus where something is spoken of as 'of the subject,' it is the substance, as if one were to say 'of the substance.' But where 'in the subject' is said, we speak of accidents, that is, what 'falls in with' (accidere) the substance, as quantity, quality, or shape. Genera and species are 'of the subject,' therefore, and accidents are 'in the subject.'
Of these nine accidents three are within the essen- tial being (usia) - quantity, [and] quality, and situa- tion - for these cannot exist without essential being. Apart from essential being, however, are place, time, and habit; relation, activity, and passivity are both within and apart from essential being. 14. The categories are accepted as being 'predicative' (appellatus) because they cannot be perceived apart from subjects. Indeed, who can perceive what 'human being' may be unless he puts some human being before his eyes as the subject of the term?
15. This work of Aristotle should be understood because, as has been said, whatever a person says is con- tained among these ten predications. It will be help- ful moreover for understanding those books that are directed to rhetoricians or dialecticians.
xxvii. The De interpretatione (De perihermeniis) 1. From here follows the De interpretatione (Perihermenias, i.e. Peri hermenias "On interpretation"), an extremely subtle book, and in its varied forms and repetitions most careful. With regard to it people say, "When he was writ- ing De interpretatione, Aristotle dipped his pen in his mind."
2. Preface to De interpretatione. Every thing that is one and is signified by one word is signified either by a sub- stantive (nomen) or a verb (verbum). These two parts of speech 'give expression to' (interpretari) everything that the mind conceives of to say, for every utterance is a 'mediator of expression' (interpres) of a thing con- ceived by the mind. 3. Aristotle, a man most skilled in the manner of expressing things and in forming statements, names this perihermenia, which we call 'interpretation'
(interpretatio), specifically because things conceived in the mind are rendered (interpretari) in expressed words through cataphasis and apophasis, that is affirmation and negation. Through affirmation, as 'a person is running'; through negation, as 'a person is not running.'
4. So in his De interpretatione the philosopher men- tioned above treats seven types: the substantive, the verb, the phrase, the proposition, affirmation, negation, and contradiction (nomen, verbum, oratio, enuntiatio, affir- matio, negatio, contradictio). 5. A 'substantive' is a vocal sound with a conventional meaning, without tense, of which no segment is separately meaningful, as 'Socrates.' A 'verb' is what designates tense. A segment of the verb (i.e. the tense ending) has no other meaning beyond always denoting those things that are said about time, as 'thinks,' 'argues.' A 'phrase' is a meaningful vocal sound, of which some segments are separately meaningful, as 'Socrates argues.' A 'propositional utterance' (enuntia- tiva oratio) is a vocal sound signifying of a thing that it is something or is not, as 'Socrates is,' 'Socrates is not.'
6. An 'affirmation' is a pronouncement (enuntiatio) by someone about something, as 'Socrates is.' A 'nega- tion' is a denial of something by someone, as 'Socrates is not.' A 'contradiction' is the 'contrary positing' (opposi- tio) of an affirmation and a negation, as 'Socrates argues; Socrates does not argue.' 7. [All these things are treated, very minutely divided and subdivided, in the book De interpretatione, and let it suffice to have intimated briefly here the definitions of these things, since a competent explanation is found in the book itself. The usefulness] of the De interpretatione is this, that syllogisms are made from the interpretations. From here 'analytic logic' (ana- lytica) is systematically investigated.
xxviii. Logical syllogisms (De syllogismis dialecticis)
1. Logical syllogisms follow from here, where the use- fulness and power of the whole art becomes clear. The conclusion of these syllogisms greatly aids the reader in investigating the truth, to the extent that the error of deceiving the opponent by the sophisms of false conclu- sions may be banished.
2. The formulations (formula) of the categories (cat- egorica), that is, of the predicative syllogisms, are three.
There are nine types of the first formulation. 3. The first type is that which draws together, that is, which assem- bles, a universal affirmation (dedicativum) from univer- sal affirmations directly (directim), as: "Every just thing is decent; every decent thing is good; therefore every just thing is good." 4. The second type is that which draws together a universal negation (abdicativum) from uni- versal affirmations and negations directly, as: "Every just thing is decent; no decent thing is wicked; therefore no just thing is wicked." 5. The third type is that which draws together a particular affirmation from a particu- lar and a universal affirmation directly, as: "A particular just thing is decent; all decent things are useful; therefore that particular just thing is useful."
6. The fourth type is that which draws together a particular negation from a particular affirmation and a universal negation directly, as: "A particular just thing is decent; no decent thing is wicked; therefore that par- ticular just thing is not wicked." 7. The fifth type is that which draws together a particular affirmation from uni- versal affirmations by indirection (reflexio), as: "Every just thing is decent; every decent thing is good; therefore a particular good thing is just." 8. The sixth type is that which draws together a universal negation from a uni- versal affirmation and a universal negation indirectly, as: "Every just thing is decent; no decent thing is wicked; therefore no wicked thing is just."
9. The seventh type is that which draws together a particular affirmation from a particular and a univer- sal affirmation indirectly, as: "A particular just thing is decent; every decent thing is useful; therefore that par- ticular just thing is useful." 10. The eighth type is that which draws together a particular negation from a uni- versal negation and a universal affirmation indirectly, as: "No wicked thing is decent; every decent thing is just; therefore a particular wicked thing is not just." 11. The ninth type is that which draws together a particu- lar negation from a universal negation and a particular affirmation indirectly, as: "No wicked thing is decent; a particular decent thing is just; therefore that particular just thing is not wicked."
12. Of the second formulation there are four types. The first type is that which draws together a universal nega- tion from a universal affirmation and a universal nega- tion directly, as: "Every just thing is decent; no wicked thing is decent; therefore no wicked thing is just." 13. The second type is that which draws together a universal
negation from a universal negation and a universal affir- mative directly, as: "No wicked thing is decent; every just thing is decent; therefore no wicked thing is just."
14. The third type is that which draws together a particu- larnegation froma particular affirmationanda universal negation directly, as: "A particular just thing is decent; no wicked thing is decent; therefore that particular just thing is not wicked." 15. The fourth type is that which draws together a particular negation from a particular negation and a universal affirmation directly, as: "A par- ticular just thing is not wicked; every bad thing is wicked; therefore that particular just thing is not bad."
16. There are six types of the third formulation. The first type is that which draws together a particular affir- mation from universal affirmations as much directly as indirectly, as: "Every just thing is decent; every decent thing is just; every just thing is good; therefore a par- ticular decent thing is good, a particular good thing is decent." 17. The second type is that which draws together a particular affirmation from a particular and a univer- sal affirmation directly, as: "A particular just thing is decent; every just thing is good; therefore a particular decent thing is good." 18. The third type is [that which draws together] a particular affirmation from a univer- sal and a particular affirmation directly, as: "Every just thing is decent; a particular just thing is good; therefore a particular decent thing is good."
19. The fourth type is that which draws together a particular negation from a universal affirmation and a [particular] negation directly, as: "Every just thing is decent; no just thing is bad; therefore a particular decent thing is not bad." 20. The fifth type is that which draws together a particular negation from a particular affirma- tion and a universal negation directly, as: "A particular just thing is decent; no just thing is bad; therefore a par- ticular decent thing is not bad." 21. The sixth type is that which draws together a particular negation from a uni- versal affirmation and a particular negation directly, as: "Every just thing is decent; a particular just thing is not bad; therefore a particular decent thing is not bad."
22. Let anyone who wishes fully to know these formu- lations of the categorical syllogisms read the book titled the Interpretations (Perihermenias) by Apuleius, and he will learn the things that have been treated there in more detail. For things that are precise and well-considered lead the reader with profit, God willing, toward the great paths of understanding.
Now let us come in due course to the 'hypothetical syllogisms' (hypotheticus syllogismus). 23. The types of hypothetical syllogisms, which are made with some con- clusion, are seven. The first type is, "If it is day, it is light; it is day; therefore it is light." The second type is, "If it is day, it is light; it is not light; therefore it is not day." The third type is thus: "It cannot be the case that it is both day and not light; yet it is day; therefore it is light." 24. The fourth type is thus: "Either it is day, or night; yet it is day; therefore it is not night." The fifth type is thus: "Either it is day, or night; yet it is not night; therefore it is day." The sixth type is this: "It cannot be the case that it is both day and not light; but [it is] day; therefore it is not night." 25. The seventh type is thus: "It cannot be the case that it is both day and night; yet it is not night; therefore it is day." If anyone should wish more fully to know the types of hypothetical syllogisms, let him read the book by Marius Victorinus entitled On the hypothetical syllogisms (De syllogismis hypotheticis).
26. At this point let us go on to the logical species of 'definitions,' which stand out with such great distinction that they can clearly show the forms of characterizing things and certain characteristics of expressions.
xxix. The division of definitions abbreviated from the book by Marius Victorinus (De divisione definitionum ex Marii Victorini libro abbreviata) 1. For philoso- phers a definition (definitio) explains, for things need- ing to be described, what the thing itself is, what sort of thing it is, and how it should be constituted with regard to its members. It is a brief statement determining the nature of each thing as it is distinguished from what it has in common with other things by an individual, proper signification. The division of definitions is presented in fifteen parts.
2. The first species of definition is oùotÛ6?ç, that is, 'substantial' (substantialis), which is properly and truly called a definition, as is "A human being is an animal, rational, mortal, capable of feeling and of learning." Now this definition, descending through the species and the differentiae, comes to the individual thing, and
most fully designates what a human being is. 3. The second species of definition, which in Greek is called svvo?µattm?, in Latin is named a 'notion' (notio), and we can speak of this 'notion' with a common, and not an individualizing name. This is always done in this way: "A human being is what in rational thought and learned skill stands out above all animals." This notion did not say what a human being is, but what one can do, calling a particular distinguishing feature to notice (notitia), as it were. In this and the remainder of the definitions a notice of the thing is presented, but no substantial (substan- tialis) explication is produced; because that first species is substantial, it holds first place among the definitions.
4. The third species of definition is called potót?ç in Greek, 'qualitative' (qualitativus) in Latin, because it takes its name from 'quality' (qualitas), since it clearly shows 'what sort of thing' (qualis) is something that exists. An example of this is the following: "A human being is one who prospers by means of intelligence and succeeds in the arts, and by his understanding of things either chooses what he ought to do, or spurns with reproach what is unprofitable." Thus by these qualities 'man' is expressed and defined. 5. The fourth species of definition is named úpoypa??tm? in Greek, and in Latin, by Cicero, 'description' (descriptio). This clarifies what a thing may be by 'writing around' (descriptio) it when a circumlocution of words and deeds is applied. In response to the question of what a greedy, or cruel, or luxurious person is like, the common nature of the lux- urious, the greedy, or the cruel is described (describere). For instance, if we wish to define the luxurious person, we say, "The luxurious person strives after a way of life that is not necessary, but sumptuous and loaded with goods; luxuries flow around him, and he is eager in lust." These and other things define the luxurious person, but they define by description. This species of definition is more suited to orators than logicians because it offers latitude as to what likeness is applied in good matters and in bad.
6. The fifth species of definition is what in Greek is mat? [?vt(c)]2?(tv, and in Latinwhat we call 'gloss' (adver- bium). This explains the word for the matter in question
by one other single word, and in a certain way it declares with the single second word what is stated in the sin- gle first word, as "conticescere ('be quiet') is tacere ('be silent')." Again, as we speak of 'terminus' as "end," or as 'depopulated' is interpreted to be "devastated." 7. The Greeks call the sixth species of definition mat? 6ta??op?v, and in Latin we call it 'by differentiation' (per differen- tiam). Writers on the arts name it 'on the same and the different' (de eodem et de altero), as when one asks what is the difference between a 'king' and a 'tyrant'; when the differentia is applied, what each is, is defined; that is, "A king is measured and temperate, but a tyrant impious and harsh."
8. The seventh species of definition is what the Greeks call mat? µ?ta??op?v, and Latin speakers, 'by metaphor' (per translationem), as Cicero in the Topics (32): "A shore is where the waves play." This can be treated variously; it can be used to admonish, to distinguish, to blame, or to praise. As it may admonish: "Nobility is the burden on descendants of the virtue of their forebears." As it may distinguish: "The crown of the head is the citadel of the body." As it may praise: "Youth is the flower of one's lifetime." As it may blame: "Riches are the long travel- money of a short life." 9. The eighth species of definition in Greek is called mat? ???a(c)p?otv tou svavt(c)oU, in Latin 'by the privative of the contrary' (per privantiam con- trarii) of that which is defined: "That is good which is not bad. That is just which is not unjust," and the like. We ought to use this kind of definition when the contrary is known, as "If the good is what profits with decency, that which is not such a thing is bad."
10. The ninth species of definition is called in Greek mat? úpotápYotv, in Latin 'by a certain outline' (per quandam imaginationem), as "Aeneas is the son of Venus and Anchises." This always involves individual items, which the Greeks call ?toµa. 11. The tenth species of definition is called in Greek mat? ?va2oy(c)av, in Latin 'by analogy' (iuxta rationem) - as if it were asked what is an animal, and it were answered, "Such as man." The example clarifies the thing previously asked about - for this is the property of a definition, that it clarify what the thing is that is asked about.
12. The eleventh species of definition is called mat' s22?tpsç ó2om2?poU óµo(c)oU ysvoUç in Greek, in Latin 'by the shortage of the full amount of the same kind' (per indigentiam pleni ex eodem genere) - as if it were asked what a triens is, and it were answered, "That which is
short of an as by two-thirds." 13. The twelfth species of definition in Greek is mat? spa(c)vov, that is, 'by praise' (per laudem), as Cicero in his Defense of Cluentius (146): "Law is the mind and spirit and counsel and judgment of the citizen body." And elsewhere (Cicero, Philippics 2.113): "Peace is tranquil freedom." It is also 'by reproach' (per vituperationem), which the Greeks call yóyoç, as (ibid.): "Slavery is the last of all evils, to be repelled not only by war, but also by death." 14. The thirteenth species of definition is called mat? tò ppóç tt in Greek, and 'by relationship' (ad aliquid) in Latin, as is this: "A father is a man who has a son," "A master is a man who has a slave."
15. The fourteenth species of definition is mat? tòv opov ("by definition"), as Cicero on rhetoric (On Inven- tion 1.42): "A 'genus' is that which embraces several parts." Again, "A 'part' is what falls under a genus." 
16. The fifteenth species of definition is called mat? a"tt- o2oy(c)av in Greek, and 'by the thing's cause' (secundum rei rationem) in Latin, as: "Day is the sun over the earth; night is the sun under the earth."
We should know that the aforementioned species of definitions are rightly linked with the subject of topics, because they are set among certain of its arguments, and are mentioned in several places among the topics. Now let us come to the topics, which are the seats of argu- ments, the springs of understanding, and the sources of style.
xxx. Topics (De topicis) 1. Topics (topica) is the dis- cipline of coming up with arguments. The division of topics, or of the commonplaces (locus) with which argu- ments are expressed, is threefold. Some inhere in the thing itself that is in question; others, which are called 'effects' (effectum), are understood to be drawn in a cer- tain way from other matters; others are taken from out- side (extrinsecus). Arguments (argumentum) that inhere inthethingitselfthatisinquestionaredividedintothree. First, from the whole; second, from the part; third, from the known.
2. The argument is 'from the whole' when a defini- tion is applied to what is in question, as Cicero says (cf. Defense of Marcellus 26): "Glory is praise rightly won by deeds and renown for great services to the state."
3. The argument is 'from parts' when he who defends himself either denies a deed or makes the defense that the deed was legal. 4. The argument is 'from a slur' (a nota) when some argument is chosen because of the force
of a particular term, as Cicero (Against Piso 19): "I was seeking, as I say, a consul - whom I could not find in that gelded boar."
5. Effects (effectum) are arguments that are known to be drawn in some way from other matters. These are fourteen in number. The first is the argument 'by cognates' (a coniugatis), as one adapts a noun and makes a verb, as Cicero says Verres 'swept' (everrere)a province (Second Action Against Verres 2.52). Or a noun from a verb, when a 'thief' is said to 'thieve.' Or a noun is made from a noun; Terence (cf. Andria 218) - 
It is a scheme of lunatics (amentium), scarcely of lovers (amantium) - 
where the ending of one term differs, formed in another declension. 6. The second argument is 'from generality' (a genere), when a maxim is spoken concerning the same genus, as Vergil (cf. Aen. 4.569):
A changing and inconstant gender. 
7. The third argument is 'from the specific' (ab specie), when a specific thing creates trust in the general ques- tion, as (Aen. 7.363):
Did not the Phrygian shepherd thus enter Lacedaemon?
The argument is 'from likeness' (a simile) when simili- tudes of some things are put forward (Aen. 10.333):
Bring close my weapons; my hand will not hurl any at the Rutulians in vain, weapons which stood in Greek bodies on the Trojan plain.
8. The argument is 'by differentiation' (a differentia) when some things are made distinct by difference, as Vergil (Aen. 10.581):
You do not espy the horses of Diomede, or the chariot of Achilles.
The Etymologies	II.xxx.9-xxxi.i  87
The argument is called 'by contraries' (acontrariis) when discordant things oppose each other, as Vergil (cf. Aen. 9.95):
Should ships made by mortal hand have the rights of immortals? And traverse uncertain dangers in certainty, Aeneas?
9. The argument is called 'from consequences' (a con- sequentibus) when something inevitably follows on the posited situation, as Vergil (Aen. 1.529):
That violence is not in our mind, nor do conquered people have such pride.
The argument is 'by antecedence' (ab antecedentibus) when something is affirmed from things that were done before, as Cicero in Defense of Milo (44): "When he has not hesitated to reveal what he planned, can you have any doubt about what he did?" 10. The argument is 'by impugning' (a repugnantibus) when what is objected is demolished by some contrary position, as Cicero (Defense of King Deiotarus 15): "This man, therefore, not only freed from such danger, but enriched with most ample honor, would have wished to kill you at home."
11. The argument is 'by cognates' (a coniugatis) when it is shown that what would result from a certain situation is against probability, as Vergil (cf. Aen. 8.147):
They believe that if they drive us away there will be nothing to prevent them from putting all Hesperia utterly under their yoke.
12. The argument is 'by causes' (a causis) when particular matters are treated with respect to common custom, as Terence (cf. Andria 582):
For some time I have had my fears about you, worried that you might do what the run of servants do and trick me.
The argument is 'by effects' (ab effectis) when something is affirmed as a result of those things which have been done, as Vergil (Aen. 4.13):
Fear betrays ignoble spirits.
13. The argument is 'by comparison' (a conparatione) when the reasoning of a statement is formed by impu- tation from a comparison of persons or cases, as Vergil (cf. Aen. 10.81):
You can take Aeneas from the hands of the Greeks . . . but is it wrong that I in my turn helped the Rutulians in some way?
14. Then there are arguments that are introduced from outside (extrinsecus), which the Greeks call ?tsyvoç, that is, 'without art' (artis expers), as is 'testimony' (testimo- nium)- indeed testimony consists of the thing itself. 15. This class of arguments is divided into five types: first, 'by the character' (ex persona); second, 'by the authority of nature' (ex naturae auctoritate); third, 'by the circum- stances of the authorities' (ex temporibus auctoritatum); fourth, 'from the sayings and deeds of ancestors' (ex dic- tis factisque maiorum); fifth, 'by torture' (ex tormentis). Now the third type above, 'by the circumstances,' branches into eight species. The first is intelligence, the second wealth, the third age, the fourth luck, the fifth art, the sixth usage, the seventh necessity, the eighth the coincidence of chance happenings. Testimony is every- thing that is taken from some external matter in order to carry conviction. Not every sort of person has the grav- ity of testimony that arouses credence; rather it should be someone esteemed for probity of character. 16. The 'authority of nature' holds the greatest strength. Many testimonies confer authority: intelligence, wealth, age, luck, art, usage, necessity, and the coincidence of chance happenings. Trust is sought 'by the sayings and deeds of ancestors' when the sayings and deeds of former people are mentioned. Trust is conveyed 'by torture'; after it no one is believed to be willing to lie. 17. The matters that are treated 'by the circumstances,' because they are obvious
from the terminology, need no definition.
It should be stored in the memory that topics offer arguments in common for orators, logicians, poets, and legal experts. When they apply to an examination of specifics, they pertain to rhetoricians, poets, and legal experts, but when they are used in general disputation they are clearly the business of philosophers. 18. Clearly this is a wonderful kind of achievement, that it has been possible to gather into one whatever the mobility and variety of the human mind could discover as it looked for understanding in diverse subjects, encompassing the free and willful intellect. Indeed, wherever it turns, in whatever thinking it engages, human ingenuity cannot but fall into one of the arguments discussed above.
xxxi. Opposites (De oppositis) 1. There are four types of contraries (contrarium), which Aristotle calls
?vttm?(c)µ?vov, that is, 'opposites' (oppositum) because they seem to stand opposing one another as if face to face, as contraries. Still, not all things that are opposed (opponere) to one another are contraries, but all things are opposed by a contrary. 
The first type of contrary is called diverse (diversus) according to Cicero (Topics 35), because these are set against one another as such complete opposites that they have no part in the things to which they are opposed, as 'wisdom' to 'stupidity.' 2. This type is divided into three species: some have a middle (medium); some are without a middle; and some have a middle but are nevertheless without a term for it, unless each of the contraries creates a term for it. 'White' and 'black' have a middle term, because often 'pale' or 'dark' is found between them. 3. Those contraries are without a middle whenever only one of the two opposites occurs at one time, as 'health' or 'sickness.' There is no middle of these. Then, those contraries of which the middle has no term - as 'happy, unhappy,' have the middle, 'not happy.'
The second type of contraries is of relatives (relativus), which are opposed to one another in such a way that they are compared with themselves, as 'double, single.'
4. Only this type of opposites is referred to itself, for there is no 'greater' unless it is compared with 'lesser,' and no 'single' unless with 'double.' Now one relative is opposed to another in such a way that the thing that is put in opposition may either be part of that to which it is opposed, or be related to it in some way. Hence 'half' is opposed to 'double' - and is the middle term of that 'double' - but is so opposed to it that it is part of that to which it is opposed. 5. Thus 'small' is opposed to 'great' in such a way that a specific small thing is 'small' in comparison with the great thing to which it is opposed. The oppositions mentioned above called contraries are so opposed to one another that they are not part of the things to which they are opposed nor related to them in any way. Indeed 'iniquity' is a contrary of 'justice' such that iniquity is not a part of that same justice, nor is iniquity related to it.
6. 
The third type of opposites is possession (habitus) or lack (orbatio). Cicero names this type 'privation' (pri- vatio), because it shows that someone possessed (habere) something of which he has been deprived (privare). Of this type there are three species: the first is 'in the thing' (in re), the second 'in the place' (in loco), the third 'at the appropriate time' (in tempore congruo). 'In the thing,' as 'blindness,' 'sight.' 'In the place,' as the place of blindness and sight is 'in the eyes.' 'At the appropri- ate time,' as we do not speak of an infant as 'toothless' when his brief life so far has denied him teeth. Indeed, he has not been 'deprived' of teeth that have not yet erupted.
7. The fourth type of contrary sets up an opposition 'from an affirmation and a negation' (ex confirmatione et negatione), as "Socrates disputes, Socrates does not dispute." This differs from the ones above because those can be spoken singly, whereas these cannot be spoken of except jointly. This fourth type of contrary has aroused much controversy among logicians, and by them is called 'intensely opposite' (valde oppositum), since indeed it takes no mediating term (tertium). 8. For some of these other oppositions can have a mediating term, as, among the contraries, 'black' and 'white.' The mediating term of this contrary is neither 'white' nor 'black,' but 'dark' or 'pale.' This is the case among relatives also, as 'many' and 'few.' Of this the mediating term is neither 'many' nor 'few,' but 'a middling number.' In 'possession' or 'lack,' as 'sight' and 'blindness,' the mediating term is neither 'blindness' nor 'sight,' but 'weak eyes.' But this one - 'he reads, he does not read' - has no mediating term at all.
