i. Medicine (De medicina) 1. Medicine is the art that protects or restores the body's health; its subject matter concerns illnesses and wounds. 2. To medicine belong not only things practiced by the skill of those properly called physicians (medicus), but also matters of food and drink, clothing and shelter. Ultimately, it consists of every defense and fortification by means of which our body is preserved [healthy] in the face of external blows and accidents.
ii. The term 'medicine' (De nomine eius) The term 'medicine' (medicina) is thought to be drawn from 'moderation' (modus), that is, temperateness, in that medicine is applied not in full measure but little by little. Indeed, nature grieves at excess and rejoices at restraint. Hence those who drink potions and remedies copiously and unceasingly are troubled. Anything that is immod- erate brings not health but danger.
iii. The inventors of medicine (De inventoribus medicinae) 1. Among the Greeks, Apollo is considered the author and discoverer of the art of medicine. His son Aesculapius expanded the art, whether in esteem or in effectiveness, 2. but after Aesculapius was killed by a bolt of lightning, the study of healing was declared for- bidden, and the art died along with its author, and was hidden for almost fifty years, until the time of Artaxerxes, king of the Persians. Then Hippocrates, a descendant of Asclepius (i.e. Aesculapius) born on the island of Cos, brought it to light again.
iv. The three schools of medicine (De tribus haere- sibus medicorum) 1. These three men established as many schools. First the Methodical school, which advo- cates remedies and charms, was founded by Apollo. Sec- ond, the Empirical school was founded by Aesculapius; it is the most grounded in experience and depends not on the symptomatic signs but on experimental results alone. Third, the Logical - that is, rational - school, founded by Hippocrates. 2. For by investigating the characteris-
109
tics of age, region, or type of illness, he deeply probed the study of the art in a rational way, so that he might use it to examine the causes of diseases with the applica- tion of reason: [he searched out cures by reasoning]. So the Empiricists advocate experience alone; the Logicians add reasoning to experience; the Methodicians take no account of reasoning from principles, nor of circum- stances, ages, and causes, but only of the actual diseases.
v. The four humors of the body (De quattuor humoribus corporis) 1. Health is integrity of the body and a balance of its nature with respect to its heat and moisture, which is its blood - hence health (sanitas) is so called, as if it were the condition of the blood (sanguis). 2. All the sufferings of the body are covered by the general term 'illness,' because the ancients used the term illness (morbus) in order to point with this word to the power of death (mors), which is born from illness. The mean between health and illness is treatment, and unless it fits the disease it fails to bring health.
3. All diseases come from the four humors, that is,
from blood, bile, black bile, and phlegm. [By these, healthy people are governed, and feeble people are stricken, for when they increase beyond their natural course they cause sickness.] Just as there are four ele- ments, so there are four humors, and each humor resem- bles its element: blood resembles air, bile fire, black bile earth, and phlegm water. And as there are four elements, so there are four humors that maintain our bodies.
4. Blood took its name from a Greek origin, because it is made vigorous, is nourished, and lives. The Greeks gave choler its name because it ends in the space of a day; hence it is called 'cholera,' that is, 'little bile,' being an effusion of bile - for the Greeks call bile yo2?. 5. Black bile (melancholia) is so called because it is a large amount of bile mixed with the dregs of black blood, for in Greek black is µs2aç and bile is yo2?. 6. Blood (sanguis) is so called in Latin because it is sweet (suavis); hence people who are dominated by blood are sweet-tempered and pleasant. 7. They gave phlegm its name because it is cold,
for the Greeks call coldness ??2?yµov?. Healthy people are governed by these four humors, and feeble people are afflicted as a result of them, for when they increase beyond their natural course they cause sickness. Acute sufferings, which the Greeks call ò(sa, arise from blood and bile, whereas from phlegm and black bile come long- standing conditions, which the Greeks call ypóvta.
vi. Acute illnesses (De acutis morbis) 1. An ò(?±a is an acute illness that either passes quickly or kills rather quickly, such as pleurisis, or phrenesis, for in Greek ò(áç means acute and swift. xpóvta is a prolonged illness of the body that lingers for a long time, such as gout or consumption, for ypóvoç in Greek means time. Some afflictions have taken their name from their own causes.
2. Fever (febris) is named from heat (fervor), being an abundance of heat. 3. Frenzy (frenesis) is named either from an impediment of mind - for the Greeks call the mind ??psv?ç - or from the sufferers' gnashing their teeth, since frendere is grinding of teeth. It is a disturbed state, accompanied by agitation and dementia, caused by an onslaught of bile. 4. Cardiaca takes its name from the heart (cor, gen. cordis), as the condition when the heart is afflicted by some fear or sorrow, for the Greeks call the heart map6(c)a. It is a suffering of the heart accompanied by terrible fear.
5. Lethargy (lethargia) is named after the word for sleep (cf. 2?9apy(c)a, "drowsiness"). It is an overpower- ing of the brain, accompanied by forgetfulness and inces- sant sleep like that of one who is snoring. 6. Synanchis is so called from constraint of breath and choking, for the Greeks say oUv?yy?tv for "constrain." Whoever suf- fers from this ailment is choked by a pain in the throat.
7. Phleumon is a heat in the stomach accompanied by swelling and pain, [or ??2?yµov? is feverishness accom- panied by flushed skin, pain, spasm, hardness, and wast- ing away]. Fever follows the onset of phleumon, whence it is also called ??2?yµov?, from ??2sy?tv, that is, "caus- ing inflammation." Thus it took its name from the way it feels. 8. Pleurisy (pleurisis) is a sharp pain in the side accompanied by fever and bloody sputum. The side is called p2?Up? in Greek, and from this the pleuritic afflic- tion took its name. 9. Peripleumonia is an affliction of the lungs accompanied by severe pain and gasping, for the Greeks call the lungs p2?áµYv, and the disease is named after this. 10. Apoplexy (apoplexia) is a sudden effusion of blood on which one chokes and dies. It is
called apoplexy because sudden death occurs from its fatal stroke, and the Greeks call a stroke ?póp2?(tç.
11. Spasm (spasmus) in Latin is the sudden contraction of body parts or sinews, accompanied by severe pain. They say that this affliction is named after the heart, which contains the principal seat of our vitality. Spasm occurs in two ways, from surfeit or from emptiness.
12. Tetanus (tetanus) is a severe contraction of nerves from the neck to the back. 13. Telum (lit., "weapon") is a pain in the side, so called by physicians because like a sword it whips through the body with pain. 14. Ileos is a pain of the intestines, whence they are also called ilia. In Greek ilios means "wrap around," seeing that the intestines twist around themselves because of the pain. Intestines in this condition are also called turminosus, from their torment (tormentum). 15. `? 6po??oß(c)a is fear of water, for the Greeks call water u6Yp and fear ??óßoç; hence Latin speakers also call this lymphaticus from fear of water (cf. lympha, "water"). It is caused either by the bite of a rabid dog or from its froth cast upon the ground. If a human or beast should touch this foam he is either filled with madness or becomes rabid. 16. A carbuncle (carbunculus) is so called because at first it glows red, like fire, and then turns black, like an extinguished coal (carbo).
17. Pestilence is a contagion that as soon as it seizes on one person quickly spreads to many. It arises from cor- rupt air and maintains itself by penetrating the internal organs. Although this generally is caused by powers in the air, it never occurs without the consent of almighty God. 18. It is called pestilence (pestilentia) as if it were pastulentia, because it consumes (depascere, ppl. depas- tus) like fire, as (Vergil, Aen. 5.683):
The pestilence descends on the entire body. 
Again, contagion (contagium) is from 'touching' (contin- gere), because it contaminates anyone it touches. 19. The swellings (inguen) (i.e. of bubonic plague) are so called from their striking the groin (inguen). Pestilence is also called plague (lues), so called from destruction (labes) and distress (luctus), and it is so violent that there is
no time to anticipate life or death, but weakness comes suddenly together with death.
vii. Chronic illnesses (De chronicis morbis) 1. Chronic disease (chronia) is an extended illness that lasts for a long time, like gout or consumption, for ypóvoç in Greek means "time." 2. Headache (cephalea) has its name for a good reason, for it is an affliction of the head, and the Greeks call the head m???a2?. 3. Scothomia takes its name by association, because it brings sudden darkness (cf. omótoç, "darkness") to the eyes, accompa- nied by vertigo of the head. Vertigo ("spinning") occurs whenever the wind rises and sends the earth into a spin.
4. Similarly in the human vertex the arteries and veins produce turbulence from the release of moisture, and make a spinning sensation in the eyes; from this spin- ning, vertigo is named.
5. Epilepsy (epilemsia) took its name because it hangs over the mind as much as it possesses the body, and the Greeks call 'hanging over' spt2?y(c)a. It arises from the melancholy humor, whenever it has been excessive and has moved into the brain. This ailment is also called 'falling sickness' (caduca), because the person ill with it falls (cadere) down and suffers spasms. 6. Common people call epileptics 'lunatics' (lunaticus), because they think that the insidious forces of demons follow them in accordance with the course of the moon (luna). They are also called 'possessed by spirits' (larvaticus, cf. larva, "an evil spirit"). It is also called the 'comitial disease,' that is, a major and divine illness by which epileptics are possessed. Its force is such that a strong person suffering from it falls down and froths at the mouth. 7. It is called comitial because among the pagans, when it occurred on any day of assembly (comitium), the assembly was dismissed. Among the Romans there was a regular day of assembly on the first day of January. 8. Mania (mania) is so called from insanity or madness, for the ancient Greeks used to call madness µavtm?, either because of their unbalanced state, which the Greeks called manie, or from divination, because µav?±v in Greek means "to
divine." 9. Melancholy (melancholia) is so called from black bile, for the Greeks call black, µs2aç, and bile, yo2?. Now epilepsy arises in the imagination, melancholy in the reason, and mania in the memory. 
10. Typus is a cold fever, and is improperly called tipus after the name of a plant that grows in the water. In Latin typus means "form" or "state." It is a cycle of accesses and recessions (i.e. of fever) across fixed intervals of time.
11. Rheum (reuma) in Greek is called eruption (eruptio) or discharge (fluor) in Latin. Catarrh (catarrhus) is a con- tinual discharge of rheum from the nostrils; it is called hoarseness (ßp?yyoç) when it reaches the throat, and ptáotç when it reaches the chest or lungs. 12. Coryza occurs whenever a draining from the head reaches the bones of the nose, and causes irritation accompanied by sneezing, whence it takes the name coryza (cf. mópUSa, "nasal discharge"). 13. Branchos is a choking of the throat caused by a cold humor, for the Greeks call the gullet, which the throat surrounds, ßp?yyoç, and we incor- rectly call it brancia. 14. Hoarseness (raucedo) is a loss of voice; it is also called arteriasis because it makes the voice hoarse and tight from damage to the windpipe (arteria). Wheezing (suspirium) got that name because it is a dif- ficulty with inhaling, and the Greeks call it 6áopvota, that is, choking. 15. Peripleumonia took its name from the lungs (pulmo), for it is a swelling of the lungs accom- panied by an effusion of bloody foam. 16. Haemoptysis (haemoptois) is an issuing of blood through the mouth; hence it got its name, for a³µa means "blood."
17. Consumption (tisis, i.e. phthisis) is an ulceration and swelling in the lungs, which is usually contracted more easily by young people. It is called ??9(c)otç (lit. "wast- ing away") among the Greeks, because it involves a 'wast- ing away' (consumptio) of the entire body. 18. Cough (tussis) is named after the term for 'depth' in Greek, because it comes from deep in the chest, as opposed to higher in the throat, where the uvula tickles. 19. Apos- tem (apostoma) got its name from 'abcess,' for the Greeks call abcesses apostomas. 20. Empiesis (enpiis) is so called from 'abcess within' (apostoma intrinsecus), either in the side or in the stomach, accompanied by pain, fevers, coughing, and copious frothing and purulence. 21. The disease hepaticus took its name from an affliction of the liver, because the Greeks call the liver ?pap. 22. Lieni- tis (lienosis) took its name from the spleen (splen), for the Greeks call the spleen (lien) op2?v. 23. Dropsy (hydropis) took its name from the aqueous humor of
the skin, for the Greeks called water u6Yp. It is a fluid below the skin, accompanied by swelling distention and fetid exhalation. 24. Nephrosis (nefresis) took its name from illness of the kidneys, for the Greeks call the kidneys v???po(c).
25. Paralysis (paralesis) is so called from damage to the body caused by excessive chilling, occurring either in the entire body, or in one part. 26. Cachexia (cacexia) took its name from injury [or condition] of the body, for the Greeks called an unfortunate malady may?((c)a. This disease is caused by a sick person's intemperance, or by poor administration of medical treatment - or it is a slow recovery following an illness. 27. Atrophy (atrofia) took its name from a wasting of the body, for the Greeks call an abstention from nourishment ?tpo??(c)a. It is a weakness of the body due to hidden causes and slow convalescence.
28. Sarcia is an excessive increase in flesh, by which a body grows fat beyond measure, for the Greeks call flesh o?pma (i.e. o?p(). 29. Sciatica (sciasis) is named after the part of the body that gives trouble, for the Greeks call the bones of the hip joints, whose tips reach to the edge of the pelvis, "oy(c)a. This condition is caused by phlegm, whenever it descends into the vertical bones and causes glutination. 30. The Greeks say that gout (podagra) was named after its swelling of the feet (cf. poáç, gen. po6óç, "foot") and its deadly pain. Indeed, we incorrectly call anything that is harsh 'brutal' (agrestis; as if podagra were
po6- + agrestis).
31. The disease arthritis (artriticus) drew its name
from affliction of the joints (articulus). 32. A cauculus is a stone that occurs in the bladder, and it took its name from that (i.e. calculus, "pebble"). It is formed from phlegmatic matter. 33. Strangury (stranguria) is so called because it constricts (stringere), causing difficulty in passing urine (urina). 34. Satyriasis (satiriasis) is con- tinual sexual desire accompanied by erection of the natu- ral places (i.e. the genitals). This affliction is named after satyrs. 35. Diarrhea (diarria) is a continual flow from the bowels without vomiting. 36. Dysentery (disinteria) is a 'separation of a continuity,' that is, an ulceration of the intestine, for dis- means "separation" and intera means "intestines." It occurs following that discharge which the Greeks call 6t?ppota. 37. Lientery (lienteria) is so called because it causes food to slide through the smoothness (lenis) of the intestines (cf. svt?pov, "gut"), as it were, without any blockage. 38. The disease colic (colica) got its name from the intestine, which the Greeks call m?2ov
(i.e. mó2ov). 39. Rhagades (ragadia) are so called because fissures are gathered in the wrinkles (ruga) around the anal orifice. These are also called hemorrhoids (emor- roida) from their discharge of blood, for the Greeks call blood a³µa.
viii. Illnesses that appear on the surface of the body (De morbis qui in superficie corporis videntur) 1. Alopecia (alopicia) is a loss of hair with a yellowing of the surrounding hair so that it has a bronze shade. It is called by this name from its resemblance to a little fox, which the Greeks call ?2Ûp?(. 2. Parotids (parotida) are areas of hardness or accretions that emerge in the vicinity of the ears, caused by fever or something else, whence they are called papYt(c)6?ç, for Yta is the Greek word for ears. 3. Lentigo is a small speckling of spots in the form of a round, so called from its resemblance to a lentil (lenticula). Latin speakers call erysipelas (erisipela) 'sacred fire' - speaking in antiphrasis, as it should be cursed - inasmuch as the skin grows flame-red on its surface. Then neighboring places are invaded by a cor- responding redness, as if by fire, so that a fever is raised.
5. Serpigo (serpedo) is a rash accompanied by protruding pustules, and it took its name from 'creeping' (serpere), because it creeps over the limbs. 6. Impetigo (impetigo) is a dry scurf, rising from the skin with a rough surface in a round patch - the common word for this is sarna.
7. Prurigo is so called from burning up (perurere) and flaming. 8. Nyctalopia (nyctalmos) is a disease that denies sight to one's open eyes during the day and returns it when darkness comes at night - or, as many people would have it, gives sight by day and denies it by night (nox, gen. noctis). 9. Warts (verruca) are one disease, satyriasis is another. Warts occur one at a time, whereas satyriasis consists of one more prominent blemish with many others around it. 10. Scabies and lepra (i.e. leprosy or psoriasis): either affliction presents a roughness of the skin with itching and scaliness, but scabies is a mild roughness and scaliness. Scabies took its name from this, in that it sheds its scabs, for the word scabies is as if it were squamies ("scaliness"). 11. But lepra is a scaly rough- ness of skin like the pepperwort (lepida herba), whence it took its name. At one time its color turns black, at another, white, at another, red. In the human body lepra
is recognized in this way: either when its various colors appear in different places among the healthy parts of the skin, or when it spreads all over, so that it makes the whole skin one color, although it is abnormal.
12. The disease elefantiacus is so called from the resem- blance to an elephant - whose innately hard and rough skin gave its name to what is a disease in humans - because it makes the surface of the body like the skinof an elephant, or because the disease is massive, like the same animal from which it derives its name. 13. The Greeks name jaundice (hicteris, i.e. ictericus) after the name of a certain animal that is of the color of bile. Latin speak- ers call this 'rainbow-colored disease' (morbus arcuatus) from its resemblance to the rainbow (arcus)- but Varro says it is to be called aurigo (i.e. aurugo) after its gold (aurum) color. People think that jaundice is called the royal (regius) disease because it may fairly easily be cured with good wine and regal (regalis) food. 14. Cancer (can- cer, lit. "crab") is named from its resemblance to the sea animal. As physicians say, its lesion can be cured by no medication, and therefore the part of the body where it has arisen is customarily amputated, so that the body may live somewhat longer. However, death, even if it has been delayed, will come.
15. A furuncle (furunculus) is a tumor that rises to a point, so called because it is inflamed (fervere), as if the word were fervunculus. Hence in Greekit is called ?v9pa( (lit. "charcoal"), because it is inflamed. 16. Ordeolus is a very small purulent accretion located in the eyelashes, broad in the middle and thinner on either side, resem- bling a grain of barley (hordeum), and from this it took its name. 17. Oscedo is a disease in which the mouth (os) of an infant develops sores, so called from the weariness of those who yawn (oscitare). 18.A frenusculus is an ulcer around the opening of the mouth, similar to ulcers in draft animals that are caused by the roughness of the bit (frenum). 19. An ulcer is putrefaction itself. A wound (vulnus) is so called because it is made by a weapon, as if it were 'by violence' (vis). And an ulcer (ulcus) is so called because it smells (olere), as if the term were olcus; hence also the plural form ulcera. 20.A pustule (pustula) is a swelling or accretion on the surface of the body.
21.A pimple (papula) is a very small bump on the skin, surrounded by red- thus papula, as if it were pupula (i.e. "pupil of the eye"). 22. Fistula (syringio).  Sanies is so
called because it arises from blood (sanguis), for blood is turned into sanies by the kindled heat of a wound. Sanies
occurs nowhere but where blood has come, because nothing that grows putrid could putrefy unless it were hot and moist, which blood is. Sanies and tabes (i.e. two kinds of fluid produced by putrefaction) differ from each other in that sanies is a discharge from living people, tabes from the dead. 23. A scar (cicatrix) is the covering of a wound, preserving the natural color of the affected parts. It is so called because it covers the wound and hides (obcaecare) it.
ix. Remedies and medications (De remediis et medicaminibus) 1. The curing power of medicine should not be scorned, for we recall that Isaiah ordered something medicinal for Hezekiah when he was failing, and the apostle Paul said to Timothy that a moderate amount of wine is beneficial. 2. The treatment of diseases falls into three types: pharmaceutics (pharmacia), which Latin speakers call medication (medicamen); surgery (chirurgia), which Latin speakers call 'work of the hands' (manuum operatio) - for 'hand' is called y?(c)p by the Greeks (cf. also spyov, "work"); and regimen (diaeta), which Latin speakers call rule (regula), that is, the careful observance of a regulated way of life. And every treat- ment has these same three characteristics: first, regimen; second, pharmaceutics; and third, surgery. 3. Regimen is the careful observance of a regulated way of life. Pharma- ceutics is treatment by medication. Surgery is incision by iron tools, for by the iron blade those things that have not responded to the medicinal power of pharmaceutics are cut out.
4. More ancient medicine was practiced using herbs andpotionsalone. The practice of healingbegan byusing such things, and later started using the blade and other medications. 5. All treatment is applied by use either of opposites or of similarities. By means of opposites, as cold is applied to hot, or moist to dry - just as in a human pride cannot be cured unless it be cured by humility. 6. By means of similarities, as a round bandage is put on a round wound and an oblong bandage on an oblong wound - for the bandaging itself is not the same for all limbs and wounds, but a similar is suited to a similar. These two treatments make their types of assistance clear through their names. 7. The Greek word 'antidote' (antidotum) means 'derived (datum) from the opposite' in Latin, for opposites are cured by opposites in accordance with the methodology of medicine. On the other hand there is treatment by similarity, as indicated
by the term p(c)mpa (i.e. "remedy, bitter thing"), which is translatedas'bitterness'(amara) becauseitstasteisbitter (amarus). Amara got its name appropriately, because the bitterness (amaritudo) of disease is usually resolved by bitterness.
8. All medications have their names due to appropriate reasons. The remedy hiera is so called as if it were 'holy,' (cf. ¬?póç, "holy"). Arteriace, so called because it is suit- able for the channel of the gullet and alleviates swellings in the throat and windpipe (arteria). Tyriaca is an anti- dote made from snakes (cf. 9?ptamóç, "of venomous beasts") that expels venom, so that poison is resolved by poison. Cathartics (catarticum) in Greek are called purgatives (purgatorium) in Latin. 9. Catapotia, because a little is drunk (potare) or swallowed down. Diamoron got its name from the juice of the mulberry (morum), from which it is made; likewise diacodion, because it is made from the poppy-head (codia; cf. mÛ6?ta, "poppy- head"), that is, from the poppy; and similarly diasperma- ton, because it is made from seeds (cf. opspµa, "seed").
10. Electuarium is so called because it melts in the mouth. Lozenge (trociscos) is so called because it is shaped like a wheel, for in Greek tpoyóç means "wheel."
Collyria echoes a Latin word, because it clears flaws in the eye (oculus). Epitima, because it is administered 'on top of' (cf. spt-, "upon") other remedies that precede it. 11. Poultice (cataplasma), because it is only a cover- ing. A plaster (inplastrum, i.e. emplastrum) because it is applied(inducere). An emollient (malagma), becauseitis softened (macerare, and cf. mollis, "soft") and absorbed without the use of fire (ignis). Enema (enema) in Greek is called 'loosening' (relaxatio) in Latin. A pessary (pes- sarium) is so called because it is put inside.
12.A certain Greek, Chiron, invented medical practice for draft animals. For this reason he is pictured as half man, half horse. He was named Chiron from the term y?tp(c)S?o9at (i.e. "operate by hand"), because he was a surgeon (chirurgus). Physicians speak of certain days as critical (creticus, cf. mptttmóç); I believe this name was assignedtothemwithregardtothejudgment(cf. cernere, ppl. cretus, "decide, determine") of an illness, because they pass judgment, as it were, on a person, and either punish or free the person with their sentence.
x. Medical books (De libris medicinalibus) 1. An aphorism (aphorismus) is a short saying that describes the entire meaning of the matter under consideration.
2.A prognostic (prognosticon) is a treatise on the foresee- ing of the progression of diseases, so called from 'fore- knowing' (praenoscere), for a physician should recognize the past, know the present, and foresee the future. 3. A dinamidia describes the power of herbs, that is, their force and capability. In herbal medicine, potency itself is called 6ávaµtç, whence also the books where herbal remedies are inscribed are called dinamidia.A 'botanical treatise' (butanicum, i.e. botanicum, cf. ßot?v?, "herb") about plants is so called because plants are described in it.
xi. The instruments of physicians (De instrumentis medicorum) 1. An enchiridion is so called because it is gripped in one's hand while it contains many iron instruments, for in Greek, 'hand' is called y?(c)p. 2. The lancet (phlebotomum, i.e. phlebotomus) is named from incision, since incision is called toµ? in Greek. 3. Simi- laria . . . Angistrum . . . Spatomele . . . A 'cupping glass' (guva), which is called a 'gourd' (cucurbita) by Latin speakers for its resemblance to one, is also called ven- tosa (lit. "wind-like") from its hiss. In brief, when it is livened in its breath (i.e. when the air within it is heated) by a small flame, it is immediately positioned so that it completely covers the place on the body where a cut has been made, which then heats up under the skin or deeper and draws either a humor or blood to the sur- face. 4. Clistere . . . Mortar (pila) from crushing (pisere, i.e. pinsere) seeds, that is, grinding them up. From this also 'crushed herbs' (pigmentum), because they are made (agere) in a mortar and with a pestle (pilum), as if the word were piligmentum. A mortar is a concave vessel suited to use by physicians, in which, properly, grains are usually ground for tisanes and herbs for drugs are crushed. 5. But Varro reports that there was a certain Pilumn[i]us in Italy who was first to grind (pinsere) the crop, whence [also] the terms 'miller' (pilumnus) and 'baker' (pistor). Therefore both the mortar (pila) and the pestle (pilum), by which grain is crushed, were invented by this man, and are named after his name. The pes- tle is what crushes whatever is placed in the mortar.
6. The mortarium ("mortar") is so called because seeds
already desiccated (mortuus) and reduced to powder are tempered there. 7. A 'small mortar' (coticula) is that in which eye-salves (collyrium) are dissolved after they have been stirred around. It should be smooth, for a small mortar that is rough makes the salve shatter instead of dissolving.
xii. Scents and ointments (De odoribus et unguentis)
1. Scent (odor) is named after 'air' (aer). 2. It is called incense (thymiama) in the Greek language, because it is scented, for a flower that bears a scent is called thyme (thymum). With regard to this, Vergil (Geo. 4.169):
And (the honey) is redolent with thyme.
3. Incense (incensum) is so called because it is 'consumed by fire' (igne consumere) when it is offered. 4. Tetrai- dos formulae is the name for small, elongated shapes of incense made from four ingredients, for in Greek tsttapa means "four," and ?²6oç means "shape."
5. Myrrh (stacten) is an incense that is exuded under pressure, and is so called by the Greeks from otamtóç (i.e. "oozing""), from the verb ot?S?tv (i.e. "trickle"), that is, exuded. 6. Balsam (mirobalanum) is so called because it is made from the scent-bearing nut of which Horace speaks (Odes 3.29.4):
The pressed ben-nut (balanus, i.e. the source of balsam) for your hair.
Oil (oleum) is a pure substance, mixed with nothing else. But ointment (unguentum) is anything made from com- mon oil and enriched with a mixture of other ingredi- ents, assuming a pleasant scent and producing odor for some time.
7. Some ointments are named after places, as was telinum, which Julius Caesar mentions, saying (Court- ney fr. 2):
And we anoint our bodies with sweet telinum.
This used to be manufactured on the island of Telos, which is one of the Cyclades. 8. And some ointments are named after their inventors, as is amaracinum: some people report that a certain royal youth, Amaracus by name, fell by accident when he was carrying many kinds of ointments and created a greater scent from the mixing. Hence the finest ointments are now called amaricina, but these are from a kind of flower, (i.e.
amaracus, "marjoram"). 9. There are still others that are named from the aromatic quality of their mate- rial, such as 'oil of roses' (rosaceum) from 'rose' (rosa) and 'henna ointment' (quiprinum, i.e. cyprinum) from 'henna' (quiprum, i.e. cyprum) - hence these also carry the scent of their own material. 10. Some of these oint- ments are 'simples' - the ones that are made from only one kind of ingredient - and hence they also carry the scent associated with their name. An example is anet- inum, for this is unmixed, from oil and dill (anetum) alone. 'Composite' ointments, however, are those made from many ingredients mixed together, and these do not bear a scent associated with their name, because the scent they produce is indeterminate, as the other ingredients that are mixed in persist in their own scents.
11. Cerotum . . . Calasticum . . . Marciatum . . . 
xiii. The foundations of medicine (De initiis medicinae) 1. Some people ask why the art of medicine is not included in the other liberal disciplines. It is for this reason: the liberal disciplines treat individual topics, but medicine treats the topics of all. Thus the physician ought to know grammar, so that he can understand and explain what he reads. 2. Similarly he must know rhetoric, so that he is capable of summing up the cases he treats with true arguments. He must also know dialectic in order to scrutinize and cure the causes of disease with the application of reason. So also arithmetic, to reckon the number of hours in the onsets of illness, and their periods of days. 3. Likewise with geometry, so that from his knowledge of the qualities of regions and the location of places, he may teach what a person should attend to there. Then, music will not be unknown to him, for we read of many things that have been accomplished for sick people by way of this discipline - as we read of David who rescued Saul from an unclean spirit with the art of melody. The physician Asclepiades also restored a certain victim of frenzy to perfect health through harmonious sounds. 4. Finally, he will be acquainted with astronomy, through which he may observe the logic of the stars and the change of seasons. For, as a certain physician says, according to their mutations our bodies are also changed. 5. Thus medicine is called the Second Philosophy, for each discipline claims for itself the entire human: by philosophy the soul is cured; by medicine, the body.
