i. The originators of laws (De auctoribus legum) 1. Moses of the Hebrew people was the first of all to explain the divine laws, in the Sacred Scriptures. King Phoroneus was the first to establish laws and legal processes for the Greeks. 2. Mercury (i.e. Hermes) Trimegistus first gave laws to the Egyptians. Solon was first to give laws to the Athenians. Lycurgus first devised legal structures for the Spartans by the authority of Apollo. 3. Numa Pompilius, who succeeded Romulus to the throne, first established laws for the Romans. Then, when the pop- ulation was no longer able to bear the factious magis- trates, they brought the Decemvirs (lit. the "ten men") into being to write laws; these men set forth in the Twelve Tables the laws whichhad been translated fromthe books of Solon into the Latin language. 4. These men were: Appius Claudius, Genucius, Veterius, Julius, Manlius, Sulpicius, Sextius, Curatius, Romilius, and Postumius. These Decemvirs were selected to draw up laws. 5. The consul Pompey first wanted to undertake the collection of the laws into books, but he did not continue for fear of detractors. Then Caesar began to do this, but he was killed first. 6. And gradually the ancient laws became obsolete due to age and neglect; although none of them is still in use, nevertheless a knowledge of them seems needful. 7. New laws originated from Emperor Con- stantine and the others following him, but they were mixed and disordered. After this, Theodosius Augustus the younger instituted a code, made in imitation of those of Gregorius and Hermogenianus, of decrees from the time of Constantine, arranging them under the name of each emperor; he called it the Theodosian Code after his own name.
ii. Divine laws and human laws (De legibus divinis et humanis) 1. All laws are either divine or human. Divine
laws are based on nature, human law on customs. For this reason human laws may disagree, because different laws suit different peoples. 2. Fas is divine law; jurisprudence (ius) is human law. To cross through a stranger's property is allowed by divine law; it is not allowed by human law.
iii. How jurisprudence, laws, and customs differ from each other (Quid differunt inter se ius, leges, et mores)
1. Jurisprudence is a general term, and a law is an aspect of jurisprudence. It is called jurisprudence (ius) because it is just (iustus). All jurisprudence consists of laws and customs. 2. A law is a written statute. A custom is usage tested by age, or unwritten law, for law (lex, gen. legis) is named from reading (legere), because it is written. 3. But custom (mos) is a longstanding usage drawn likewise from 'moral habits' (mores, the plural of mos). 'Cus- tomary law' (consuetudo) is a certain system of justice established by moral habits, which is taken as law when a law is lacking; nor does it matter whether it exists in writing or reasoning, since reason also validates law. 4. Furthermore, if law is based on reason, then law will be everything that is consistent with reason - provided that it agrees with religion, accords with orderly conduct, and is conducive to well-being. Customary law is so called because it is in 'common use' (communis usus).
iv. What natural law is (Quid sit ius naturale) 1. Law is either natural, or civil, or of nations. Natural law (ius naturale) is common to all nations, and, because it exists everywhere by the instinct of nature, it is not kept by any regulation. Such is the union of a man and woman, the children's inheritance and education, the common possession of everything, a single freedom for all, and the right to acquire whatever is taken from the sky, the earth, and the sea. 2. Also the return of something which was entrusted and of money which was deposited, and the repulsion of violence by force. Now this, or whatever is similar to it, is never unjust, but is held to be natural and fair.
v. What civil law is (Quis sit ius civile) Civil law (ius civile) is that which each individual population or city has established particular to itself, for human or divine reasons.
vi. What the law of nations is (Quid sit ius gentium)
1. The law of nations concerns the occupation of ter- ritory, building, fortification, wars, captivities, enslave- ments, the right of return, treaties of peace, truces, the pledge not to molest embassies, the prohibition of mar- riages between different races. And it is called the 'law of nations' (ius gentium) because nearly all nations (gentes) use it.
vii. What military law is (Quid sit ius militare) 1. 'Mil- itary law' (ius militare) is the formalized practice of waging war, the bond of making treaties, the march- ing against or engagement with the foe at a given sig- nal. Also the cessation of hostilities at a given signal, and the military discipline for the disgrace of desert- ing one's post; also the method of distributing mili- tary pay, the hierarchy of ranks, the honor of rewards, as when a crown or torques are given. 2. Also the dis- tribution of booty, and its equitable division based on the status and deeds of the individuals; also the leader's share.
viii. What public law is (Quid sit ius publicum) 'Pub- lic law' (ius publicum) concerns sacred things, priests, and magistrates.
ix. What quirital law is (Quis sit ius quiritum) 1. 'Quir- ital law' (ius quiritum) is, properly speaking, Roman law. No one except the Quirites, that is, the Romans, is governed by it. It concerns such things as legal inheri- tances, cretio (i.e. formal acceptance of an inheritance), guardianship, usucapio (i.e. acquisition of ownership by use): these laws are found among no other group of people, but are particular to the Romans and estab- lished for them alone. 2. Quirital law consists of laws and plebiscites, decrees and edicts of rulers, or responses of jurists.
x. What a law is (Quid sit lex) A law is a rule for a people - through it those who are nobler by birth, along with the common people, have ordained something.
xi. 
What popular resolutions (i.e. plebiscites) are (Quid scita plebium) Resolutions are established by the common people alone, and they are called resolutions (scitum) because the common people know (scire) them, or because something is sought (sciscere) and petitioned that it may take place.
xii. What a senate decree is (Quid senatusconsultum) A senate decree is something that the senators alone decide, by consulting the interests of the people.
xiii. What an order and an edict are (Quid constitutio et edictum) An order (constitutio) or edict (edictum) is that which a king or emperor orders (constituere) or decrees (edicere).
xiv. What a response of jurists is (Quid responsa pru- dentium) Responses are those things that jurists are said to answer (respondere) to those consulting them, whence the Responses of Paulus take their name. There were cer- tain experienced people, and arbitrators of equity, who composed and issued instructions of civil jurisprudence by which they might settle the quarrels and disputes of parties in disagreement.
xv. Consular and tribunitial laws (De legibus con- sularibus et tribunitiis) 1. Some laws are named from those who produced them, such as consular laws, tri- bunitial laws, Julian laws, Cornelian laws. Under Cae- sar Augustus the suffect consuls Papius and Poppaeus introduced a law that is called 'Lex Papia Poppea' from their names; this law sets up rewards for fathers for beget- ting children. 2. Under the same emperor, Falcidius, the plebeian tribune, also established a law that no one might in a will bequeath more to people outside the family than would leave one quarter for the heirs. The law is called the 'Lex Falcidia' from his name. Aquilius also [produced a law, which to this day is called 'Lex Aquilia'].
xvi. Replete law (De lex satura) A medly (satura) is a law which is concerned with many things at once; it is so called from the abundance of topics, and, as it were, from fullness (saturitas), whence also to write satires
(satura) is to compose richly varied poems, as those of Horace, Juvenal, and Persius. The laws called 'Novels' (Novella) . . . 
xvii. Rhodian laws (De legibus rhodiis) The Rhodian laws are the laws of nautical commerce, and are so named from the island of Rhodes, where the practice of com- merce existed in ancient times.
xviii. Private statutes (De privilegiis) Private statutes are the laws of individuals, private laws (privatae leges) as it were. It is called a 'private statute' (privilegium) because it is applied in private use (privatus).
xix. What a law is capable of (Quid possit lex) Every law either allows something, as "A strong man may seek reward," or it forbids, as "No one is allowed to seek mar- riage with a sacred virgin," or it prescribes punishment, as "Whoever has committed murder shall suffer capi- tal punishment." Indeed, human life is regulated by the reward or punishment of law.
xx. Why a law is enacted (Quare facta est lex) Laws are enacted in order to control human audacity through the fear they arouse, and so that innocent people may be safe in the midst of reprobates, and so that even among the impious the power of doing harm may be restrained by a dreaded punishment.
xxi. What sort of law should be made (Qualis debet fieri lex) A law should be honorable, just, feasible, in agreement with nature, in agreement with the custom of the country, appropriate to the place and time, neces- sary, useful, and also clear, lest in its obscurity it contain something deceitful, and it should be written not for private convenience, but for the common benefit of the citizens.
xxii. Cases (De causis) Wp?yµa is a Greek term that means "case" (causa) in Latin, whence also legal business is called pragmatica, and a person involved in cases or legal business is called a pragmaticus.
xxiii. Witnesses (De testibus) Witnesses [are people through whom the truth is sought in a legal process]. Before the proceedings each litigant binds (alligare) wit- nesses to himself by covenants, so that afterward the
witnesses may not be free to dissimulate or withdraw themselves, whence the witnesses are also called 'bound' (alligatus, ppl. of alligare). Also, they are called witnesses (testes) because they are usually employed for a testament (testamentum); they are also called signatories (signator), because they sign (signare) the testament.
xxiv. Legal instruments (De instrumentiis legalibus)
1.A will (voluntas) is the general name for all legal instru- ments, because it proceeds not by force, but by 'free will' (voluntas); hence it receives such a name. 2.A testament (testamentum) is so called because, unless the testator (testator) died, one could not confirm or know what was written in it, because it is closed and sealed, and it is also called 'testament' because it is not valid until after the setting up of the memorial of the testator (testatoris monumentum), whence also the Apostle (Hebrews 9:17): "The testament," he says, "is of force after people are dead." 3. Nevertheless, in Sacred Scripture, 'testament' is not only the term for that which is not valid until the testators be dead, but every pact and covenant was called a testament. Thus Laban and Jacob made a testa- ment, which was certainly valid between living people, and in the Psalms it is written (82:6): "They have made a covenant (testamentum) together against thee," that is, a pact; and innumerable such examples. 4. The tablets (tabula) of a testament are so called because before the use of papyrus sheets and parchment not only were tes- taments written on smoothed tablets, but even letters were so written. Hence those who carry these tablets were called tabellarii. 5. A testament in civil law is con- firmed by the signatures of five witnesses. 6. A testa- ment in praetorian law is sealed with the seals of seven witnesses; the former is made by citizens (civis), hence it is civil (civile) law; the latter is made in the presence of the praetors, hence it is of praetorian law. And to seal a testament is 'to put a distinguishing mark' (notare) on it so that what is written may be recognized (noscere, ppl. notus). 7. A 'holograph testament' (holographum testa- mentum) is entirely written and signed by the hand of the author, whence it receives its name, for the Greeks say o2oç for "entire," and ypa??? for "writing."
8.A testament is invalid (inritum) if he who has made the testament has lost his rights of citizenship, or if it was not made 'following prescribed procedures' (rite). 9. An inofficiosus (lit. "undutiful") testament is one that does not observe the duty (officium) of natural piety, and is
made to the benefit of non-family members, disinherit- ing the children for no good reason. 10. An annulled (ruptus) will is so named because it is broken (dis- rumpere, ppl. disruptus) by a child born posthumously, who was neither expressly disinherited, nor named as an heir. 11. A suppressed (suppressus) testament is one that was not openly made public, thus defrauding the heirs or the legatees or the freedmen. Even if it is not concealed, but nevertheless is not shown to the aforementioned people, then it appears to be suppressed (supprimere, ppl. suppressus). 12.A proclamation is that which the tes- tator reads out from wax tablets, saying "These things, as they are written on these wax tablets, so I say them and so I read them, and so you, Roman citizens, bear witness for me." And this is called a 'proclamation' (nuncupatio), because 'to proclaim' (nuncupare) is to name openly and to confirm. 13. The ius liberorum (lit. "law of children") is a reciprocal arrangement of inheritance for couples without children, naming one another as heirs in their place. 14. A codicil (codicillum), as the ancients said, is doubtless named after the originator who instituted this kind of writing. And the writing requires no formality of words, but only the desire of the testator, meaningfully expressed in any kind of writing. It is common knowl- edge that because of the difficulty of legal terminology, and the necessity of employing formalities, the wishes of the dead have been given support through the service of the codicil, so that whoever writes such a statement uses the heading of 'codicil' for what he writes. And just as a codicil is made in place of a testament, so also a letter can be made in place of a codicil. 15. A cretio is a certain number of days within which the designated heir either comes into the inheritance, or is excluded if the time of the cretio has elapsed, and there is no opportu- nity for him to receive the inheritance later. 16. Cretio is so called as if it were 'decision' (decretio), that is, decid- ing, or establishing - for example, "Let such and such a person be my heir," and it is added "and let him 'accept the inheritance' (cernere, ppl. cretus) within so many days." Moreover, a hundred-day period was established for coming into those inheritances to which a cretio was not added. 17. A fideicommissum (i.e. a request to an heir) is so called, as it specifies what 'may be done' (fiat) as commissioned (committere, ppl. commissum) by the deceased - for faith (fides) is so called because 'it may be done' (fiat); it is, however requested not in obligatory language, but as a wish.
18. A pact is a document of agreement between par- ties in a state of peace (pax, gen. pacis), approved by law and custom, and it is called pact (pactum) as if it were 'made from peace' (ex pace factum), from 'come to an agreement' (pacere), which also generates the form pepigit, "he has agreed." 19. A placitum ("agreed con- dition") is named similarly, because it pleases (placere). Some say a pact is what someone does willingly, but a placitum is what one is compelled to do even against one's will, as for example when someone is brought into the court to answer; no one can call this a pact, but rather a placitum. 20. A mandatum ("consensual contract") is so called because formerly, in a business transaction, one person would 'shake hands' (manus dabat) with the other. 21. And a 'valid act' (ratum) is, as it were, rational (rationabile) and just (rectus), whence he who pledges says "I declare this to be valid (ratum)," that is, firm and lasting. 22. Something done 'by established procedure' (rite) is not done 'by right' (recte), but according to cus- tom. 'Autograph surety' (chirographum) . . . 'Warranty' (cautio) . . . 
23. Buying and selling are exchanges of goods and con- tracts taking place by agreement. 24. Buying (emptio) is so called because it is 'from me for you' (a me tibi); selling (venditio), as if the word were venundatio, that is, from the marketplace (nundinae). 25. A donation is a settle- ment of any sort of property. And people say it is called donation (donatio) as if the word were 'presentation of a gift' (doni actio), and dowry (dos, acc. dotem) as if it were 'I give likewise' (do item) - for after the donation has taken place at the wedding, the dowry follows. 26. Indeed, there was an ancient ceremony of marriage, in which the husband and wife purchased each other, so that it did not seem that the wife was a handmaid, as we hold legally. Thence it is that after the donation of the husband takes place, the dowry of the wife follows. 27. A usufructuary donation (donatio usufructuaria) is so called for this reason, because the donor still retains the 'use of the yield' (usus fructu) from the gift, with the legal title reserved for the recipient. 28. A 'direct donation' (donatio directa) is so named because it is immediately transferred to another both in legal title and in use of the yield, and no part of it is diverted back to the legal right of the donor.
29. Covenants are, technically speaking, witnessed, and they are called covenants (condicio) from 'talk- ing together' (cond´cere), as if the word were cond´cio,
because not just one witness swears there, but two or more. Indeed, every word stands not in the mouth of one witness alone, but of two or three witnesses (cf. Deuteronomy 19:15). Furthermore, they are called covenants, because the speeches of the witnesses agree with each other, as if the word were condictiones (lit. "joint utterances"). 30. A stipulation is a promise or a pledge, whence stipulators are also called promisors. And stipulation (stipulatio) is so called from straw (stip- ula), for the ancients, when they would promise each other something, would break a straw that they were holding; in joining this straw together again they would acknowledge their pledge. [Or it is because people would have called something firm stipulus, according to Paulus the jurist.] 31.A sacramentum is a bond given in support of a promise, and it is called a sacramentum (lit. "holy thing") because to violate a promise is a breach of faith.
xxv. Property (De rebus) 1. An inheritance is property that passes to a person upon someone's death, either bequeathed by a will, or retained through occupancy. And it is called 'inheritance' (hereditas) from 'property entered in on' (res adita), or from 'money' (aes, gen. aeris), because whoever possesses land also pays the tax; whence also property (res). 2. Property is that which exists under our legal title. And 'legal titles' (ius) are things that are possessed by us lawfully (iuste), and do not belong to someone else. 3. Property (res) is so named from holding rightly (recte), and 'legal titles' from pos- sessing lawfully, for what is possessed 'with title' (ius), is possessed 'lawfully' (iuste), and what is possessed law- fully is possessed well. But what is possessed wrongly is that which is owned by someone else. Someone who either uses his own property improperly, or takes the property of another, possesses wrongly. He possesses lawfully who is not ensnared by greed. But whoever is held by greed is the possessed, not the possessor.
4. Goods are the possessions of honorable or noble people, and they are called 'goods' (bona) for that rea- son, because they have no base use, but people make use of them for good (bonus) purposes. 5.A peculium, prop- erly speaking, relates to younger persons or slaves, for a peculium is something that a father allows his son, or a master his slave, to handle as his own. And it is called
peculium from 'livestock' (pecus), of which all the wealth of the ancients consisted. 6. The possession of goods is the legal right of possession, acquired following a certain procedure and with a certain title.
7. An intestate (intestata) inheritance is one that has not been written in a testament, or, if it has, has not been legally entered upon. 8. An inheritance is called caduca (i.e. property without an heir), because its heirs have died (cadere). 9. Familia herciscunda is the division of the inheritance among the heirs, for division was called herciscunda by the ancients. 10. It is for dividing what is held in common among those who own property in common; this action requires that a mediator be assigned to the claimants, a mediator by whose arbitration the property may be divided (dividere). 11. The action of fines regundi is so called because through it the boundaries (fines) of each party may be drawn (regere), lest they be blurred, as long as the disagreement does not concern a place narrower than five feet.
12. Locatio is property lent out for use at a fixed price.
13. Conductio is property borrowed for use at an estab- lished price. 14. A res credita is property brought under terms of obligation in such a way that from the time when the contract was made it was determined that it is mortgaged. 15. Usura is the increment of interest, so called from the 'use of money' (usu aeris) that is lent.
16. Commodatum is that which is subject to our author- ity and is transferred temporarily to someone else 'with a limit' (cum modo) of the time during which he may have it, whence it is called commodatum. 17. A precar- ium exists when a creditor, having been requested by entreaty, allows the debtor to remain in possession of the cultivated land that is owing to him, and to have the fruits from it. And it is called precarium, because it 'is entered into by means of entreaty' (prece aditur), as if the word were precadium, with the letter r put for the d.
18. A mutuum (i.e. a kind of loan) is so called, because that which is given by me to you is turned 'from mine to yours' (ex meo tuum).
19.A 'deposit' (depositum) is a security entrusted for a set time, as though it were 'set down for a long time' (diu positum). And someone is seen to make a deposit when, for fear of theft or fire or shipwreck, he leaves (deponere, ppl. depositus) something with another person for safe- keeping. 20. And there is a difference in usage between a pignus and an arra. A pignus is that which is given in place of something borrowed, and when the loan is
returned, the pignus is immediately given back, but an arra is that which is given first, in partial payment for property purchased with a contract of good faith, and afterward the payment is completed. 21. For an arra must be part of the complete payment, and not given back; whence whoever has an arra does not return it as he does a security, but, rather, desires the full payment, and it is called arra 'from the thing' (a re) for which it is paid.
Furthermore there is this difference between a pignus, a fiducia and a hypotheca. 22. Fora pignus is that which is pledged on account of a loan, and at the set time the cred- itor gets possession of the loan only; ownership of the pignus remains with the borrower. 23. The term fiducia (i.e. the transference of property on trust) is used when something is transferred or the right to it is forfeited for the sake of a loan. 24. Hypotheca is the term used when a thing is lent without the deposit of a pignus, with only an agreement or warranty being made. 25. Momentum is so called from shortness of time, requiring that the loan be returned as soon as the transaction is secured, and that there should be no delay in the recovery of the debt; just as a moment (momentum) possesses no space - its point in time is so short that it has no duration of any kind.
26. An 'instrument' (instrumentum) is what we use to make (construere) something, as a knife, a reed-pen, an axe. 27. An instructum is what is made by an instrument, such as a staff, a codex, a table. 28. Usus is that use to which we put the thing that is made, such as leaning on a staff, reading in a codex, gaming on a table; but even the fruit of the fields is also called usus, because we use (uti, ppl. usus) it. These are the three uses. 29. Usufruc- tus is so called because only its yield (fructus) is held for use, and all the other rights remain with someone else.
30. Usucapio is the acquisition of ownership through the maintenance of legal possession, either for two years or for some other time. 31. Mancipatio is so called because the property is 'taken in the hand' (manu . . . capitur). Hence it is appropriate for whoever takes formal pos- session to grasp the property itself that is given into his possession.
32. Cessio is a concession (concessio) of one's own prop- erty, such as this: "I cede by right of affinity," for we say 'cede' (cedere) as if it were 'concede' (concedere), that is, those things that are our own; for we 'restore' the property of another, we do not 'cede' it. In fact, tech- nically speaking, someone is said to cede when he gives
in to another in spite of the truth, as Cicero (Defense of Ligarius 7.22): "He ceded," he says, "to the authority of a very distinguished man, or rather, he obeyed." 33. A 'temporary injuction' (interdictum) 'is pronounced for the time being' (interim dicitur) by the judge, not in perpetuity, but with the intention of changing the tem- porary order at the right time, when the conditions of the judgment are met. 34. Payment (pretium) is so called because we give 'it first' (prius eum), so that in return for it we may rightfully take possession of the property we are seeking. 35. Commerce (commercium) is named after merchandise (merx, gen. mercis), by which term we speak of things for sale. Whence an assembly of many people who are accustomed to sell and buy goods is called a market (mercatus). 36. Integri restitutio is the restoring of a case or of a property. 37. A case that has not been brought to a conclusion by the authority of the law is 'reconstituted' (redintegrare); property that has been taken or forcefully seized by the authority of the law is 'restored' (redintegrare).
xxvi. Crimes written in the law (De criminibus in lege conscriptis) 1. Crime (crimen) has its name from lack- ing (carere) - like theft, deceit, and other actions that do not kill, but cause disgrace. 2. Misdeed (facinus) is so called from doing (facere) evil that harms another. 3. 'Outrageous deed' (flagitium) is so called from 'urgently summoning' (flagitare) the corrupting power of lust, by which one harms oneself. All wrongdoing belongs to one of these two categories. 4. Force (vis) is the strength (virtus) of a powerful person, through which a case or property is either carried off or extorted. 5. It is 'private force' (vis privata) if someone, before the trial, has used armed men to drive someone from his own property or overpower him. 6. It is 'public force' (vis publica) if some- one has executed before the populace a citizen making an appeal to a judge or a king, or tortured him or whipped him or fettered him. 7. Deception (dolus) is a cunning of the mind, so named from the fact that it deludes (delud- ere), for the deceiver does one thing and pretends to do another. Petronius thinks otherwise when he says "What, judges, is deception (dolus)? Surely it is when something is done that is painful (dolere) to read about. You have 'deception'; now hear about evil." 8. Calumnia (i.e. the bringing of a charge in bad faith) is the contention of
a hostile lawsuit, called from 'using subterfuge' (calvi), that is, deceiving. 9. Deceit (falsitas) is so called from saying (fari, ppl. fatus) something other than the truth.
10. Injury (iniuria) is injustice. Hence among the comic authors (Plautus, The Braggart Soldier 436): "You are an injury," that is, someone who dares something against the rule of law (ius, gen. iuris).
11. A dissension on the part of citizens is called 'sedi- tion' (seditio), because people divide (seorsum + ire, ppl. itus, lit. "go apart") into different factions - for they greatly rejoice in disturbances and in tumult. 12. Sacrilege (sacrilegium), strictly speaking, is the theft of sacred objects. Later this term was applied to the worship of idols. 13. Adultery (adulterium) is a decep- tion with regard to someone else's marriage, which because it has defiled the 'marriage bed of another' (alterius torum), receives the name adultery. 14. 'Illicit sex' (stuprum)... Rape (raptus), strictly speaking, is ille- gal intercourse, so called from corrupting (corrumpere, ppl. corruptus) whence also he who 'gains submission over one he has taken by force' (rapto potitur) delights in illicit sex. 15. The word 'homicide' (homicidium) is com- pounded from 'man' (homo) and 'slaughter' (caedes). For whoever was proven to have committed slaughter against a person, the ancients called a homicide (homi- cida). 16. The charge of parricide was brought not only against someone who had killed his parent, that is, his father or mother, but also against someone who had killed a brother; and it was called parricide (parricid- ium) as if it were 'slaughter of a parent' (parentis caedes).
17. Internecivum iudicium (i.e. murderous judgment) was charged against someone who had given false testimony and had so caused a person's death. Ownership of the dead man's goods would pass to the accuser. And the significance of internecivus is that is refers to the destruc- tion (enectio), as it were, of an individual - for they used to put the prefix inter- in place of e-: Naevius (fr. 55): "mare interbibere" ("to drain the sea") and Plautus (fr. 188): "interluere mare" ("to wash away the sea"); that is, ebibere and eluere.
18. Theft (furtum) is the secret purloining of someone else's property, named from gloomy (furvus), that is dark (fuscus), because it takes place in the dark. Theft was a capital offense among the ancients, before the penalty of four-fold damages. Pervasio is the open appropria- tion of someone else's property. Theft involves goods that can be carried from one place to another, 19. but
pervasio involves both those things that can be moved and those that are immovable. 20. Infitiatio is denial of liability for what is owed when it is sought by a credi- tor. Similarly abiuratio is the denial of liability for prop- erty that has been loaned. 21. The judgment of ambitus is made against someone who wins office by means of bribery and 'canvasses for support' (ambire, ppl. ambi- tus, lit. "go round"); he is likely to lose the position that he gains by graft. 22. The judgment of peculatus is made against those who commit fraud with respect to pub- lic funds and embezzle public money, for peculatus is so named from money (pecunia). And the theft of pub- lic property is not judged in the same way as the theft of private property, for the former is judged as sacrilege, because the theft is of sacred things. 23. Someone who has taken money from his associates is accused of extortion (repetundae). If the accused in such a case dies before the verdict then judgment is delivered against his estate. 24. The judgment of incest (incestum) is made with regard to consecrated virgins or those who are closely related by blood, for those who have intercourse with such people are considered incestus, that is, 'unchaste' (incastus). 25. Those who have injured or violated royal majesty are liable on a charge of treason (maiestas), as are those who betray the state or connive with enemies. 26. The term piaculum (i.e. an act that demands expiation) is used for something that can be expiated (expiare), when crimes have been committed that need to be expiated according to some established practice.
xxvii. Punishments drawn up in the laws (De poenis in legibus constitutis) 1. Harm (malum) is defined in two ways: one definition being what a person does; the other, what he suffers. What he does is wrongdoing (pec- catum), what he suffers is punishment. And harm is at its full extent when it is both past and also impending, so that it includes both grief and dread. 2. Punishment (poena) is so called because it punishes (punire). But it is a noun used with an epithet, and without this additional term it does not have a complete meaning; if you add 'the punishment of prison,' 'the punishment of exile,' 'the punishment of death,' you complete the meaning.
3. The term penalty (supplicium), strictly speaking, is not
used with regard to someone who is punished in any way at all, but with regard to one who is sentenced in such a way that his goods are 'set apart as sacred' (consecrare) and are paid into the public treasury. For penalties were
once called 'supplications' (supplicamenta). It is also called supplicium whensomething is offered to God from someone's fine, whence also 'to supplicate' (supplicare).
4. Cicero writes that eight types of punishment are contained in the laws, that is, fines, fetters, lashes, com- pensation in kind, disgrace, exile, slavery, and death (cf. On the Orator 1.194). By these punishments every crime that is committed is avenged. 5. Fine (damnum) is named from a diminution (diminutio) of property.
6. Fetters (vincula) are named from 'fettering' (vincire), that is, confining, because they confine and restrain, or because they 'bind by force' (vi ligare). 7. Foot-shackles (compes) are named because they 'restrain the feet' (con- tinere + pes). 8. Peducae are nooses by which the feet are ensnared, named from 'catching the feet' (pedemcapere).
9. And chains(catena), because they 'catch hold of ' (capi- endo tenere) the feet to prevent walking. Also chains are so called because their many links catch hold of one another (se capere). 10. Manacles (manicae, lit. "sleeves") are chains by which the hands (manus) are bound - but manicae are also a part of tunics. 11. Thong-fetters (nervus) .  12. The boia is a collar for the condemned;
it is like the yoke of an ox (bos), made out of a kind of chain. 13. Prison, the place in which criminals are held in custody, and it is called prison (carcer) because in it people are confined (coercere) and shut in, as if the word were arcer, that is, from enclosing (arcere). The place in which criminals are kept we call carcer, using the singu- lar, but the place whence chariot-teams are released we call carceres (i.e. the starting gate at a race course), using the plural.
14. Whips (verber) are so called, because when they are wielded, they strike (verberare) the air. Hence lashes (fla- grum) and floggings and scourges (flagellum), because they resound on the body with a whistling (flatus) and a crack. There is flogging (plaga), as if the term were flaga: but plaga and flagrum are primary in form, and flagellum is made by forming the diminutive. 15. The anguilla (i.e. an eel-skin whip) is used to punish boys in schools; it is called scotica in common usage. 16. Cudgels (fustis) are used to beat young men for their crimes; they are so named because they may stand fixed in ditches (fossa); country people call them 'stakes.' 17. Crowbars (vectis) are so called because they are carried (vectare) in the hands, whence doors and stones are 'pried loose' (vellere), but they do not pertain to punishments of law.
18. Switches (virga) are the tips of branches and trees,
so called because they are green (viridis), or because they possess the power of persuading (vis arguendi); if it is smooth, it is a switch, but if it is knotty and has points, it is correctly called by the term scorpio (lit. "scor- pion"), because it is driven into the body leaving a curved wound. 19. Lashes (ictus), technically speaking, belong to scourges, and are named from brandishing (agitare). 20. Ungulae (lit. "claws") are so called because they dig out. These are also called fidiculae (lit. "small lutes"), because by them the accused are tortured on the rack (eculeus), so that the truth (fides) is discovered. 21. And the rack is so called because it stretches (extendere). 22. Tortures (tormentum) indeed are so called because they discover the intention (mens, gen. mentis) by twisting (torquere).
23. The quarry-prisons are a type of punishment associ- ated with whipping, invented by Tarquin Superbus for the punishment of the wicked. Indeed, this Tarquin was first to invent quarry-prisons, torture, cudgels, mines, and exile, and was himself first of the kings to earn exile.
24. 'Compensation in kind' (talio) is a punishment resembling the act being punished, so that someone suf- fers 'in such a way' (taliter) as he acted. This is established by nature and by law, so that (cf. Juvencus, Gospel Poem 1.549):
Let retribution of a similar kind fall to the one causing injury.
Whence also this is said with regard to the Law of the Old Testament (Matthew 5:38): "An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth." Compensation in kind is established for repaying not only injuries, but also favors, for this term is common to both injuries and favors. 25. Ignominy is so called because one who is apprehended in some crime ceases to have the reputation of honesty. And it is called ignominy (ignominium) as if it were the term for being sine nomine ("without reputation"), just as igno- rant (ignarus) is without knowledge, and ignoble (igno- bilis) is without nobilitas ("nobility"). 26. There is also infamy (infamium), as if it were 'without good report' (fama), and 'report' is so called because by speaking (fari), that is, talking, it roves about, creeping through the grapevine of tongues and ears. The term fama is also appropriate for both good and evil things, for 'report' is sometimes of good fortune, as in 'illustrious report,' which is praise. It is also of evils, as in Vergil (Aen. 4.174):
Report (fama), than which no other evil is more speedy.
27. Report does not possess a trustworthy name, because it is especially untruthful, either adding many things to the truth, or distorting the truth. It lasts just as long as it is not put to the test, but whenever you put it to the test, it ceases to be, and after that is called fact, not report.
28. Exile (exilium) is so called as if it were 'outside the country' (extra solum), for someone who is outside the country is called an exile (exul). Whence postliminium (i.e. the restoration of rank and privileges) for those who return, that is, those who are brought back from exile, who were cast out undeservedly, that is, cast out beyond the borders (limen) of their native land. Exile is divided into those who are relegatus and those who are deportatus. 29. A relegatus is one whose possessions accompany him; a deportatus is not so accompanied. 30. Proscription (proscriptio) is a condemnation of exile at a distance, as if it were a 'writing afar' (porro scriptio). Also, because it is 'publicly drawn up' (palam scriptus).
31. A mine (metallum) is where exiles are transported to dig out a vein of ore and hew out marble in slabs.
32. Slavery (servitus) is named from saving (servare), for among the ancients, those who were saved from death in battle were called slaves (servus). This alone is the most extreme of all evils; for free people it is worse than every kind of punishment, for where freedom is lost, everything is lost with it.
33. There are various possible means of execution; among them the cross (crux), or patibulum (i.e. forked gibbet), on which men who are hanged are tormented (cruciare) or suffer (pati), whence these take their names.
34. The patibulum is commonly called the fork (furca), as if it were 'supporting the head' (ferre caput), for hanging on a gibbet causes death by strangling; but the patibulum is a lesser punishment than the cross. The patibulum immediately kills those who are hanged on it, but the cross torments those nailed to it for a long time; whence in the Gospel the legs of the thieves were broken, so that they might die and be taken from the cross before the Sabbath, because those hanged from a cross could not die quickly (John 19:32).
35. There are also differences in the types of dying. It is especially cruel to be drowned in water, to be burned in fire, to perish from cold and hunger, to be thrown to dogs and animals. Indeed, the earlier age preferred that
death occur by the sword, for the sword understands how to bring life to the finish with a quick death, without a more grievous torment. 36.A culleum (i.e. a leather bag in which parricides were sewn up and drowned) is a con- tainer for parricides, named from covering (occulere), that is, enclosing. It is a bag made of skin, in which par- ricides were closed up along with an ape, a rooster, and a snake, and thrown into the sea. The type to which all these deaths belong is called censure. 37. Censure (ani- madversio) is what occurs when a judge punishes a guilty man, and he is said to pass censure, that is, to 'turn his attention' (animum . . . advertere) in that direction, to focus on the punishing of the accused, because he is the judge. 38. For that reason the Romans forbade water and fire to certain condemned people - because air and water are free to all and given to everyone - so that the condemned might not enjoy what is given by nature to everyone.
xxviii. The word for 'chronicles' (De chronicae vocabulo) 'Chronicle' (chronica) is the Greek term for what is called a 'succession of times' in Latin. Among the Greeks Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea, compiled such a work, and the priest Jerome translated it into Latin. xpóvoç in Greek means "time" in Latin.
xxix. Moments and hours (De momentis et horis)
1. Intervals of time are divided into moments, hours, days, months, years, lustrums, centuries, and ages. A moment (momentum) is the least and shortest bit of time, so called from the movement (motus) of the stars.
2. It is the extreme limit of brevity of the hour's segments, when one instant stops and another starts. Hour (hora) is a Greek term (cf. ?pa), but it is pronounced in the same way in Latin. The hour is the boundary of time, just as the word ora means a boundary like the shore of the sea, or the bank of a river, or the border of a garment.
xxx. Days (De diebus) 1. Day (dies) is the presence of the sun, or when the sun is over the earth, as night is when the sun is under the earth - for whether it is day or night is due to whether the sun is above or below the earth. A day properly so called is of twenty-four hours, and lasts as long as it takes a day and a night to complete the interval of their course through the turning of the sky, from one rising sun to the next. In poor usage, however, one day is the interval between sunrise and sunset. 2. Moreover, a day has two intervals: the diurnal and the nocturnal. A
day is twenty-four hours long, the interval twelve hours long. 3. The whole is called 'day' after its superior, diurnal interval. Whence the usage is that, without thinking of nights, we speak of a 'number of days,' as is written in the divine Law (Genesis 1:5): "And there was made evening and morning, one day." 4. A day according to the Egyptians begins at sunset; among the Persians, at sunrise; according to the Athenians, at the sixth hour of our day; according to the Romans, at midnight. Hence cockcrow is at that time, when their voice heralds the day, and when the midnight breeze rises.
5. Days (dies) are so called from 'the gods' (deus, abla- tive plural diis), whose names the Romans conferred upon certain astral bodies, for they named the first day from the sun, which is the chief of all the astral bodies, just as that day is head of all the days. 6. The second day is named from the moon, which is closest to the sun in brilliance and size, and it borrows its light from the sun. The third, from the star of Mars, called Vesper. The fourth, from the star of Mercury, which some call the 'white circle.' 7. The fifth, from the star of Jupiter, which they call Phaeton. The sixth, from the star of Venus, which they name Lucifer, which has the most light of all the stars. The seventh, from the star of Saturn, which, placed in the sixth heaven, is said to run its course in thirty years. 8. Hence the pagans took the names of the days from these seven stars because they thought that they were affected by these stars in some matters, say- ing that they received their spirit from the sun, their body from the moon, their intelligence and speech from Mercury, their pleasure from Venus, their blood from Mars, their disposition from Jupiter, and their bodily humors from Saturn. Such indeed was the stupidity of the pagans, who made up such ridiculous figments for themselves.
9. Among the Hebrews, however, the first day is called 'one of the sabbath' (una sabbati); this is our Lord's Day (dies dominicus), which the pagans called the day of the sun. The 'second of the sabbath' is our second weekday (feria), which secular people call the day of the moon. 'Third of the sabbath,' the third weekday, which they call the day of Mars. 'Fourth of the sabbath,' the fourth week- day, which is called the day of Mercury by the pagans.
10. 'Fifth of the sabbath' is the fifth weekday, that is, fifth counting (i.e. inclusively) from the Lord's Day, which is called the day of Jupiter among the pagans. 'Sixth of
the sabbath' is what the sixth weekday is called, which is named the day of Venus among those same pagans. The sabbath is the seventh counting (i.e. inclusively) from the Lord's Day, and the pagans dedicated it to Saturn and named it the day of Saturn. 'Sabbath' is translated from Hebrew into Latin as "rest," because on that day God rested from all his works. 11. Now, in a Christian mouth, the names for the days of the week sound better when they agree with the Church's observance. If, however, it should happen that prevailing practice should draw someone into uttering with his lips what he deplores in his heart, let him understand that all those figures whose names have been given to the days of the week were themselves human. On account of certain mortal gifts they were very able and achieved distinction in this world, and so they were granted divine honors by their devotees both in the days and in the stars. But the stars were first named from the names of humans, and the days were named from the stars.
12. Weekdays (feria) were named from 'speaking' (fari), because on those days we have a time for speech, that is, to speak in the divine office or in human busi- ness. Of these there are festival days, instituted on behalf of humans, and holy days, for divine rites. 13. There are three parts of a day: morning, midday, and evening. 14. In the morning the light is advanced and full, no longer twilight. It is called morning (mane) from the adjective 'good,' because the ancients used manus as a word for 'good' - for what is better than light? Others think that morning is named from the 'departed spirits' (Manes), whose abode is between the moon and the earth. Others think the name is from 'air,' because it is manus, that is, rarified and transparent. 15. Midday (meridies) is so called as if the word were medidies, that is, the 'middle of the day' (medius dies), or because then the day is purer, for merum means "pure." Indeed, of the whole day noth- ing is brighter than midday, when the sun shines from the middle of the sky and lights the whole globe with equal clarity. 16. Evening (suprema) is the last part of the day, when the sun turns its course toward its setting - so called because it 'still exists' (superesse) up to the final part of the day. 17. The 'late hour' (serum) is so called from the 'door-bars' (sera) that are closed when night comes on, so that one may be safer in one's sleep.
18. Today (hodie) is as if it were 'on this day' (hic dies, ablative hoc die). And the word is quotidie (i.e. "daily"),
not cotidie, seeing that it is 'on every day' (quot diebus). 19. Tomorrow (cras, also meaning "in the future"), because it is 'hereafter.' 20. Yesterday (hesternum) is the day before, and called hesternum because that day is now apart (extraneus) and remote from us from its having passed by. 21. 'The day before' (pridie), moreover, as if it were 'on the previous day' (priori die). 22. 'On the day before yesterday' (perendie), that is, 'beyond the day before' (per ante diem) or 'in advance,' that is, before- hand.
xxxi. Night (De nocte) 1. Night (nox) is so called from 'harming' (nocere), because it impairs the eyes. It has the light of the moon and stars, so as not to be without adornment, and so that it may comfort all those who work at night, and so that it may have sufficient light for certain living creatures that cannot tolerate sunlight.
2. Further, the alternation of night and day is made to provide the shift between sleeping and waking, so that the resting time of night may temper the effort of daily work. 3. Night occurs either because the sun is wearied from its long journey, and when it has passed over to the last stretch of the sky, grows weak and breathes its last fires as it dwindles away, or because the sun is driven under the earth by the same force by which it carries its light over the earth, so that the shadow of the earth makes night. Hence Vergil (Aen. 2.250):
Night rushes from the Ocean, cloaking with its great shadow both earth and sky.
4. There are seven parts of a night: early evening, dusk, late evening, the dead of night, cockcrow, early morn- ing, and daybreak. 5. Evening (vesperum) is named for the western star (i.e. Vesper), which follows the setting sun and precedes the oncoming darkness. Concerning it, Vergil (cf. Aen. 1.374):
Sooner, as the heavens are closed up, does the evening star (Vesper) lay the day to rest.
6. 
Darkness (tenebrae) is so called because it 'holds shadows' (tenere umbras). 7. Dusk (crepusculum) is an uncertain light, for we call an uncertain thing 'obscure' (creper), that is, it is between light and darkness. 8. The 'late evening' (conticinium) is the time when all is silent, for to be silent is conticescere. 9. The 'dead of night' (intempestum) is the middle and inactive time (tempus) of night, when nothing can be done and all things are at rest in sleep, for time is not perceived on its own account, but by way of human activities, and the mid- dle of the night lacks activity. 10. Therefore intempes- tus means "inactive," as if it were 'without time' (sine tempore), that is, without the activity by which time is perceived. Whence the expression, "you have arrived 'at an untimely moment' (intempestive)." Hence the dead of night is so called because it lacks time, that is, activity.
11. Cockcrow (gallicinium) is so called from cocks (gallus), the heralds of light. 12. The 'early morning' (matutinum) falls between the passing of darkness and the coming of dawn, and it is called matutinum because this is the time of the beginning of morning (mane). 13. Daybreak (diluculum) is as if it were the little 'light of day' (diei lux) just now beginning. 14. This is also called aurora, which comes before the sun. Thus aurora is the prelude of the day as it grows light and the first bright- ness of the air, which is called  Ûç ("dawn") in Greek. By borrowing we name it aurora, as if it were eorora. Hence this verse (cf. Vergil, Aen. 2.417):
And the East Wind rejoicing in its horses of dawn (Eoos). 
And (Vergil, Aen. 1.489):
And the army from the east (Eous).
xxxii. The week (De hebdomada) The week (hebdo- mada) is so called from its seven days, whose repetition makes up the months and years and centuries - for the Greeks call seven spt?. We call this a septimana, as if it were 'seven (septem) lights,' for the morning (mane) is light. Now the eighth day is the same as the first, the day to which the sequence of the week returns, and from which it starts again.
xxxiii. Months (De mensibus) 1. The name 'month' (mensis) is Greek, taken from the name of the moon, for the moon in Greek is called µ?v?. Hence in Hebrew
the proper months are numbered not from the circuit of the sun but by the course of the moon, that is, from new moon to new moon. 2. The Egyptians, however, first reckoned the day of the month from the course of the sun, because of the swifter course of the moon, so that no error in computation would come about because of its speed, for the slower movement of the sun could be perceived more easily. 3. The month of January (Ianuar- ius) is so called from Janus, to whom it was consecrated by the pagans, or because January is the threshold and doorway (ianua) of the year. Hence Janus is depicted as two-faced, to display the entrance and the exit of the year. 4. February (Februarius) is named from Februus, that is, Pluto, for whom sacrifices were performed in that month - for the Romans consecrated January to the heavenly deities and February to the gods of the under- world. Therefore February was named from Februus, that is Pluto, not from 'fever' (febris), that is, a sickness.
5. March (Martius) was named after Mars, the founder of the Roman people, or because at that time all living things are stirred to virility (mas, gen. maris) and to the pleasures of sexual intercourse. 6. This month is also called the month of new things, because the month of March is the beginning of the year. It is also called the 'new spring (ver),' from its signs of germination, because in that month opportunity for business deals is signaled by the new crops 'turning green' (viridantibus).
7. April (Aprilis) is named for Venus, as if it were Aphrodis, for in Greek Venus is called %??po6(c)t? - or because in this month everything 'is opened' (aperire) into flower, as if it were Aperilis. 8. May (Maius) is named from Maia, the mother of Mercury, or from the elders (maior) who were the leading men of the state, for the Romans dedicated this month to older people, but the following one to younger people. 9. Hence the latter is called June (Iunius), because formerly the peo- ple were divided into 'centuries' of older and younger (iunior). 10. But July (Iulius) and August (Augustus) were named in honor of individual men, Julius and Augus- tus Caesar. Earlier these months were called Quintilis and Sextilis: Quintilis, because it was the fifth (quintus) month (counting inclusively) from March, which the Romans held to be the beginning of the year, and Sex- tilis likewise, because it was sixth (sextus). 11. Septem- ber (September) takes its name from the number and from 'rain' (imber), because it is the seventh (septi- mus) from March and brings rain. Thus also October
(October), November (November), and December (December) received their names from the number and imber. December finishes this run of numbers, because the tenth number (i.e. decem, "ten") closes off the pre- ceding numbers.
12. Moreover, the Romans established the Kalends, Nones, and Ides with reference to festival days, or with reference to the offices of their magistrates, for on those days there would be an assembly in the cities. 13. Some people think that the Kalends (i.e. the first day of the month) were named after 'to worship' (colere), for among the ancients the beginnings of every month were worshipped, just as among the Hebrews. Most Latin speakers think the Ides were so named after 'eating' (edere), because among the ancients those were days for feasting. 14. The Nones were so called from nundinae, which are days of public assemblies or markets.
xxxiv. Solstices and equinoxes (De solstitiis et aequinoctiis) 1.A solstice (solstitium) is so called as if it were 'the stopping-place of the sun' (solis statio), because at that time, when the sun is standing still, either the day or the night begins to grow. An equinox (aequinoctium) is so called because at that time the day and the night have an equal period of hours. 2. There are two solstices: one is the estival, on June 24, from which time the sun begins to return to its lower altitudes; the other is the hibernal, December 25, when the sun begins to rise to its higher altitudes. Hence it follows that the hibernal sol- stice is the shortest day, and the estival is the longest. 3. Similarly, there are two equinoxes, the one vernal and the other autumnal, and the Greeks call them the "o?µ?p(c)at (cf. ­ooç, "equal"; ?µ?poç, "day"). These equinoxes fall on March 25 and September 24, because the year formerly would be divided into two parts only, that is, the estival and hibernal solstices, as well as into the two celestial hemispheres.
xxxv. The seasons of the year (De temporibus anni) 1. There are four seasons of the year: spring, summer, fall, and winter. They are called seasons (tempus) from the 'balance of qualities' (temperamentum) that each shares, because each in turn blends (temperare) for itself the
qualities of moisture, dryness, heat, and cold. The sea- sons are also called circuits (curriculum) because they do not stand still, but 'run a course' (currere). 2. Fur- ther, it is clear that after the world was made the seasons were divided into groups of three months because of the nature of the sun's course. The ancients divided each season, so that in its first month spring is called 'new,' in its second 'mature,' and in its third 'declining.' 3. So in its three months summer is new, mature, declining; like- wise the new, mature, and declining fall, and the new, mature, and declining or 'extreme' winter. Hence the verse (cf. Vergil, Geo. 1.340):
At the setting of extreme winter.
Spring (ver) is so called because it 'is green' (virere), for then, after winter, the earth is clothed with plants and everything bursts into flower. 4. Summer (aestas) takes its name from aestus, that is, "heat"; also aestas as if it were 'burnt' (ustus), that is, 'burned out' (exus- tus) and arid, for heat is arid. 5. Fall (autumnus) is so called from the season when the leaves of the trees fall and everything ripens. 6. The condition of the celestial hemisphere (hemisphaerium) gave its name to winter (hiems), because at that time the sun wheels in a shorter course. Hence this season is also called bruma, as if it were ßpayáç, that is, short (brevis). Or the name 'winter' is from food, because at that time there is a greater appetite for eating, for 'voracity' in Greek is called ßp?µa (lit. "food") - hence also a person who is squeamish about food is called inbrumarius. 7. The 'hibernal' (hibernus) time is between winter and spring, as if it were hievernus; this commonly signifies "winter," giving the name of its part to the whole season.
These seasons are ascribed to particular parts of the sky. 8. Thus spring is linked to the east (oriens), because at that time everything springs (oriri) from the earth; summer to the south, because that part is more flaming with heat; winter to the north, because it is numb with cold and continual frost; fall to the west, because it brings serious diseases, whence also at that time all the leaves
of the trees fall. The meeting of cold and heat and the conflict between different kinds of air are the reason why fall abounds with diseases.
xxxvi. Years (De annis) 1. The year is the orbit of the sun, when it returns to the same place in the heavens after the passage of 365 days. It is called a year (annus, cf. anus, "ring") because it wheels back upon itself with the recurring months - hence also a ring (anulus) is so called, as if it were annuus, that is, a circle, because it returns upon itself. So Vergil (Geo. 2.402):
And the year (annus) wheels back upon itself along its own tracks.
2. Thus, among the Egyptians before the invention of letters, it was indicated by a dragon depicted as biting its own tail, because it turns back upon itself. Others call it annus from the term ?vav?ouo9at (i.e. "renew"), that is, from its renewal, for it is always renewed.
3. There are three kinds of years. The lunar year is of thirty days; the solstitial year, which contains twelve months; or the great year, when all the heavenly bodies have returned to their original places, which happens after very many solstitial years. 4. The era (aera) of par- ticular years was established by Caesar Augustus, when he first described the Roman world by conducting a cen- sus. It was called an era because everyone in the world promised to render a coin (aes, gen. aeris) to the state.
xxxvii. Olympiads, lustrums, and jubilees (De olympiadibus et lustris et iubileis) 1. The Olympic games were established among the Greeks in the neigh- borhood of Elis, a Greek city, with the people of Elis performing a contest and competition every fifth year (i.e. counting inclusively), with four years intervening. Because of this they referred to the time cycle of the contest of the Elians as an olympiad (olympias), with a period of four years counted as one olympiad. 2. But a lustrum is a p?vt?t?p(c)ç, that is, a five-year period, because it is said to have been set in the fifth year by the Romans, following the example of the olympiads - for there was not yet a reckoning of time by consuls or by eras. It is a period of five years. It is called lustrum because the city of Rome was purified (lustrare) every five years when the census was conducted in the state. 3.A jubilee (iubileus) is translated as "a year of forgiveness." Both the term and the number are Hebrew. It is made up of
seven sets of seven years, that is, forty-nine years. On the jubilee trumpets blared, and their old holdings reverted to each person, debts would be forgiven, and liberties confirmed. 4. We ourselves celebrate this number still in the number of days of Pentecost after the resurrection of the Lord, with sin forgiven and the written record of our whole debt erased, as we are freed from every trammel, receiving the grace of the Holy Spirit coming upon us.
xxxviii. Periods and ages (De saeculis et aetatibus)
1. Saecula consist of generations, and hence the term saeculum, because they 'follow' (sequi) one after another, for when some pass away, others take their place. Some call a saeculum a period of fifty years, which the Hebrews call a jubilee. 2. It was for this reason that the Hebrew who - on account of his wife and children, and loving his master - was kept in slavery with his ear pierced, was commanded to serve for a saeculum, that is, up to the fiftieth year (see Exodus 21:5-6). 3. An 'age' commonly means either one year, as in the annals, or seven, as one of the ages of a human, or a hundred - or any period. Hence an age is also a time composed of many centuries. And an age (aetas) is so called as if it were aevitas, that is, something similar to an aeon (aevum). 4. For an aeon is a perpetual age, whose beginning or end is unknown. The Greeks call this an a"Ûv, and they sometimes use this word for 'century,' sometimes for 'eternity' - and from Greek it was borrowed by Latin speakers. 5. The term 'age' properly is used in two ways: either as an age ofa human- as infancy, youth, old age- or as an age of the world, whose first age is from Adam to Noah; second from Noah to Abraham; third from Abraham to David; fourth from David to the exile of Judah to Babylon; fifth from then, [the Babylonian captivity], to the advent of our Savior in the flesh; sixth, which is now under way, to when the world itself comes to an end. The succes- sion of these ages through generations and reigns is thus reviewed. 
xxxix. A description of historical periods (De descrip- tione temporum) 1. The first age has the creation of the world as its beginning, for on the first day God, with the name of 'light,' created the angels; on the second, with the name of the 'firmament,' the heavens; on the third, with the name of 'division,' the appearance of waters and the earth; on the fourth, the luminaries of the sky; on the fifth, the living creatures from the waters; on the
sixth, the living creatures from the earth and the human being, whom he called Adam.
The first age
2. 230
In the year 230 Adam begot Seth, from
435
whom descended the children of God.
In his 205th year Seth begot Enosh, who
625
began to call upon the Name of the Lord.
In his 190th year Enosh begot Kenan.
795
In his 170th year Kenan begot Mahalalel.
3. 960
In his 165th year Mahalalel begot Jared.
1122
In his 162nd year Jared begot Enoch, who was
1287
translated to heaven.
In his 165th year, Enoch begot Methuselah.
4. 1454
In his 167th year, Methuselah begot Lamech.
1642
In his 188th year, Lamech begot Noah. The
5. 2242
ark is built.
In the 600th year of Noah occurred the
Flood. [Indeed, when Noah was 500 years
old he begot three sons: Shem, Ham, and
Japheth. In the 600th year of his life occurred
the Flood. From Adam to this cataclysm
there are 2252 years.]
The second age
2244 Two years after the Flood, [when he was 100 years old,] Shem begot Arphachshad, from whom sprang the Chaldeans.
2379 In his 135th year Arphachshad begot Shelah, from whom sprang the Samaritans and the Indians.
2509 In his 130th year Shelah begot Eber, from whom sprang the Hebrews.
6. 2643 In his 134th year Eber begot Peleg. The tower is built [and in this time occurred the division of languages, and the people were dispersed through the whole earth because of the building of the tower].
2773 In his 130th year Peleg begot Reu. The gods are first worshiped.
2905 In his 132nd year Reu begot Serug. The kingdom of the Scythians begins.
7. 3035	In his 130th year Serug begot Nahor. The kingdom of the Egyptians is born.
3114	In his 79th year Nahor begot Terah. The kingdoms of the Assyrians and Sicinians arise.
3184	In his 70th year Terah begot Abraham.
Zoroaster invented magic.
The third age
8.  3284
In his 100th year Abraham begot Isaac and
3344
Ishmael, from whom sprang the Ishmaelites.
In his 60th year Isaac begot Jacob. The
3434
kingdom of the Argives begins.
In his 90th year Jacob begot Joseph.
Phoroneus gave laws to Greece.
9.  3544
Joseph is 110 years old. Greece begins to
cultivate crops.
3688
The Hebrews' slavery [in Egypt], for 144
years. Atlas invented astronomy.
3728
Moses, 40 years. The Hebrews began to use
letters.
10. 3755
Joshua, 27 years. Ericthonius in Troy [first]
yoked a chariot.
3795
Othniel, 40 years. Cadmus gave letters to the
Greeks.
3875
Ehud, 80 years. The fables were composed.
3915
Deborah, 40 years. Apollo [invented the art
of medicine and] invented the cithara.
11. 3955
Gideon, 40 years. Mercury constructed the
lyre.
3958
Abimelech, 3 years. The chorus was invented
in Greece.
3981
Tola, 23 years. Priam reigned in Troy.
4003
Jair, 22 years. Carmentis invented the Latin
letters.
4009
Jephthah, 6 years. Hercules cast himself into
the flames.
4016
Ibzan, 7 years. Alexander (i.e. Paris) seized
Helen.
4024
Abdon, 8 years. Troy was seized.
4044
Samson, 20 years. Ascanius founded Alba
Longa.
12. 4084
Eli [the priest], 40 years. The Ark of the
Covenant is seized.
4124 Samuel and Saul, 40 years. Homer is thought to have lived.
The fourth age
13. 4164
David, 40 years. Carthage is founded by
Dido. [Gad, Nathan, and Asaph prophesied.]
4204
Solomon, 40 years. The Temple of Jerusalem
is built.
14. 4221
Rohoboam, 17 years. The kingdoms of Israel
and Judah are divided.
4224
Abijam, 3 years. Abimelech was chief priest
under him.
4265
Asa, 41 years. Ahijah, Amos, Jehu, Joel, [and
Azariah] prophesied.
15. 4290
Jehoshaphat, 25 years. Elijah, Abdiah, and
Micaiah prophesied.
4298
Jehoram, 8 years. Elijah and Elisha
prophesied.
4299
Ahaziah, 1 year. Elijah is taken up to heaven.
4306
Athaliah, 7 years. The priest Jehonadab
became famous.
16. 4346
Jehoash, 40 years. Elisha dies.
4375
Amaziah, 29 years. Carthage founded.
4427
Uzziah, 52 years. The Olympic games are
instituted by the Greeks.
4443
Jotham, 16 years. Romulus is born.
17. 4459
Ahaz, 16 years. Rome is founded.
4488
Hezekiah, 29 years. The Senate is founded in
Rome.
4543
Manasseh, 55 years. The Sibyl of Samos
flourished.
4555
Amon, 12 years. The first census is taken.
18. 4587
Josiah, 32 years. The philosopher Thales is
well known.
4598
Jehoiakim, 11 years. Nebuchadnezzar
captures Judea.
4609
Zedekiah, 11 years. The Temple of Jerusalem
is burnt.
The fifth age
19. 4679 The Captivity of the Hebrews, 70 years. The story of Judith is written.
4713	Darius, 34 years. The Captivity of the Judeans ends.
4733 Xerxes, 20 years. Sophocles and Euripides are honored tragedians, [and they are considered very famous and distinguished].
20. 4773 Artaxerxes, 40 years. Ezra redacts the Law which had been burnt.
4792 Darius, [also named Nothus] 19 years. This age included Plato.
4832 Artaxerxes, 40 years. The story of Esther is completed.
The sixth age
26. 5210	Octavian, 56 years. Christ is born.
5233	Tiberius, 23 years. Christ is crucified.
5389 Helius Pertinax, 1 year. It has nothing of interest for history.
5407 Severus, 18 years. The scholar Symmachus lives.
31. 5414 Antoninus, 7 years. The fifth reconstruction of Jerusalem is devised.
5415	Macrinus, 1 year. His short life contains no noteworthy deeds.
5418	Aurelius, 3 years. Sabellius appears.
32. 5431	Alexander, 13 years. The famous Origen lives.
5434 Maximus, 3 years. He conquered the Germans.
5441 Gordianus, 7 years. He triumphed over the Parthians and Persians.
33. 5448 Philippus, 7 years. He was the first Christian emperor.
5449 Decius, 1 year. The monk Antony flourished. 5451	Gallus, 2 years. Novatus founded his heresy. 5466 Valerian, 15 years. Cyprian is crowned with
martyrdom.
34. 5468 Claudius, 2 years. He expelled the Goths from Illyricum.
5473  Aurelian, 5 years. He persecutes Christians.
5474  Tacitus, 1 year. [He did nothing memorable.]
35. 5480 Probus, 6 years. The Manichean heresy arose.
5482 Carus, 2 years. He triumphed over the Persians.
The Etymologies	V.xxxix./6-xxxix.42  133
5502 Diocletian, 20 years. After sacred books were burnt, he made martyrs.
5504 Galerius, 2 years. [He performed nothing worthy of recounting.]
36. 5534	Constantine, 30 years. The Nicene synod is assembled.
5558	Constantius, 24 years. The Anthropomorphite heresy rises.
5560 Julian, 2 years. From being a Christian, he became a pagan.
37. 5561	Jovianus, 1 year. He converted back to Christianity.
5575	Valentinian, 14 years. The Goths convert to heresy.
5581	Gratian, 6 years. Priscillian becomes well known.
5590 Valentinian, 9 years. Jerome is commended in Bethlehem.
5593	Theodosius, 3 years. John Anachorite became famous.
38. 5606 Arcadius, 13 years. John Chrysostom flourished.
5621	Honorius, 15 years. Bishop Augustine became famous.
5648 Theodosius, 27 years. The heresiarch Nestorius lived.
39. 
5654 Marcian, 6 years. The synod of Chalcedon is gathered.
5670 Leo the Elder, 16 years. Egypt rants with the error of Dioscorus.
5687 Zenon, 17 years. The heresy of the Acephalites arose.
40. 5714	Anastasius, 27 years. Bishop Fulgentius is acclaimed.
5722 Justinus, 8 years. The heresy of the Acephalites is rejected.
5761	Justinian, 39 years. The Vandals are destroyed in Africa.
5772 Justinus, 11 years. The Armenians accept faith in Christ.
41. 5779  Tiberius, 7 years. The Langobards seize Italy.
5800 Mauricius, 21 years. The Goths convert to the Catholic faith.
5807 Phocas, 7 years. The Romans are slaughtered by the Persians.
42. 5824 Heraclius governs for the seventeenth year. [During the fourth and fifth year of the most religious ruler Sisebut] the Jews in Spain convert to Christianity.
[Thus is summarized the whole period, from the begin- ning of the world up to the present tenth year of the most glorious prince Recesvintus, which is the year 696 of our era, the year 5857.] The remaining time of the sixth age is known to God alone. 
