i. Dust and dirt clods (De pulveribus et glebis terrae)
1. Dust (pulvis) is so named because it is driven (pellere) by the force (vis) of the wind, for it is carried on the breath of the wind, neither resisting nor able to stay put, as the Prophet says (Psalm 1:4): "Like the dust, which the wind driveth from the face of the earth." 2. Mud (limus) is so named because it is soft (lenis). Mire (caenum) is a pit of filth. Cinders (cinis) are named from burning (incendium), for that is how they are made. Ashes (fav- illa), because they are made as a result of fire, for fire is ???ç. 3. A clod (gleba) because it is a ball (globus), for it is compacted as a clump of dust, and unified into a single ball. Earth, then, that is joined together is a clod, and earth that is separated is dust. 4. Labina is named by derivation from 'falling' (labes) because it causes people to fall as they are walking. Some think that filth (lutum) is named using antiphrasis, because it is not clean, for everything that has been washed (lavare, ppl. lotus) is clean. 5. Wallowing- places (volutabrum) are named because swine wallow (volutare) there. 'Marshy ground' (uligo) is a muck con- sisting of mud and water. Sabulum (i.e. a small coarse sand) is the lightest type of earth.
6. 'White clay' (argilla) is named from the Argives, who were the first to make vases from it. 'Cretan earth' (Creta, i.e. white potter's clay) is named from Crete, where the better sort is found. Cimolia is white Cretan earth, named after the Italian island Cimea; one kind softens the precious colors of clothing and brightens cloth that has been darkened by sulfur, and another kind gives brightness to gemstones. 'Silver' Cre- tan earth (Creta argentaria, "silversmith's whiting"), actually white, is so named because it restores the luster of silver. 7. 'Samian earth' (terra Samia) is named after
the island of Samos; it is glutinous and white and soft on the tongue, indispensable for medicines and for mak- ing containers. 8. 'Puteolan dust' (pulvis Puteolanus, i.e. "pozzolana") is collected in the hills near Puteoli in Italy and is positioned so as to restrain the sea and break the waves. When it is submerged in water, it immediately turns into stone and, made stronger by the daily waves, is turned into rock, just as white clay is turned to stone by fire.
9. Sulfur (sulphur) is so named because it is kindled with fire, for pup is "fire." Thus its force can be felt even in boiling water, and no other material is ignited more easily. It originates between Sicily and Italy in the Aeolian islands, which people say are on fire. It is also found by excavation in other places. 10. There are four kinds of sulfur. The 'living' kind, which is dug up, is translucent and green; physicians use it alone of all the kinds of sulfur. The second kind, which people call 'lump sulfur' (i.e. fuller's earth), is used only by fullers. The third kind is 'liquid'; it is used for fumigating wool because it gives whiteness and softness. The fourth kind is particularly suitable for preparing lamp-wicks. The power of sulfur is so great that it cures the 'comitial sickness' (see IV.vii.7) through its vapor when it is set on the fire and burns. When a person puts sulfur in a goblet of wine and carries it around with hot coals beneath he glows with the eerie pallor of a corpse from the reflection of the blaze.
ii. Earthy materials derived from water (De glebis ex aqua) 1. Bitumen (bitumen) comes forth in the lake Asphaltites (i.e. the Dead Sea) in Judea; sailors in skiffs collect floating clumps of it as they draw near. In Syria it is a mud that boils up from the earth in various places. Both kinds are compacted and combine into a dense mass, and the Greeks call both ptoo?o??a2toç (i.e. a compound of asphalt and pitch). Its nature is burning and related to fire, and it cannot be split by water or iron, but only by female impurities (i.e. menses; see XI.i.141). It is useful for caulking ships. 2. Alum (alumen) is named from 'light' (lumen), because it furnishes brightness to
cloth being dyed. It is a salt-like substance of the earth, and is made during the winter from water and mud, and matured by the summer sun. There are two forms of alum: liquid and condensed.
3. Some people think that salt (sal) is so named because it springs out (exsilire) when cast into fire, for it flees the fire whenever it is set alight, but this is according to its nature, since fire and water are always hostile to each other. Others think that salt is named from the ocean (salum) and the sun (sol), since it is generated sponta- neously by seawater as foam deposited on the edges of the seashore or cliffs and evaporated by the sun. There are also lakes and rivers and wells from which it is drawn. From there it is heaped up in salt pits, and dried by the sun; but rivers are also thickened into salt, when the rest of the water flows under the ice. Elsewhere it is collected by removing sand on nights when the moon is waxing; for in Cyrene, rock salt ([h]ammoniacus) is found beneath the sand. There are even mountains of natural salt, where it may be mined with tools, like min- erals, and reappears in still greater quantity. In some places it is so hard that people make walls and houses out of masses of salt, as in Arabia. 4. Various salts also differ in their natural properties, for in one place it is mild, in another excessively salty. Common salt crackles in fire; Tragasean salt does not crackle in fire or leap out; Agrigentian salt from Sicily, although enduring flame, leaps out of water, and, contrary to nature, flows when it is in the fire. 5. There are also differences in color. Memphis salt is red; in the part of Sicily near Etna it is purple, while in that same Sicily, in Pachynum, it is so bright and glistening that it casts reflections; in Cap- padocia saffron-colored salt is mined. 6. Salt (sal) by its nature is necessary for all food. It gives savor to relishes, it excites hunger, and it arouses an appetite for all foods. Indeed all enjoyment of food and the greatest cheerful- ness comes from salt. Hence health (salus) is thought to take its name, for nothing is better for us than salt (sal) and sun - in fact, we see that the bodies of sailors are well-hardened. And even livestock, flocks, and beasts of burden are called to pasture particularly with salt, and are more productive of milk and more obliging at giving cheese. Salt tightens bodies; it dries and binds them. It preserves corpses from falling into putrefaction so that they last.
7. Natron (nitrum) takes its name from a place, for it is found in Nitria, a town or region of Egypt; from
this material medicines are made and dirty clothes and bodies are washed. Its nature is not so different from salt, for it has the strength of salt and similarly occurs at shorelines that grow white as they dry out. 8. The Greek term aphronitrum is 'foam of natron,' spuma nitri in Latin. Concerning this a certain poet says (Martial, Epigrams 14.58):
Are you a bumpkin? You don't know what my Greek name is. I am called 'foam of natron.' Are you Greek? It is aphronitrum.
It is gathered in Asia where it distills in caves; from there it is dried in the sun. It is thought to be best if it has as little weight and is as easily crumbled as possible, and is almost purple in color. 9. Chalcantum is named because it is the thyme (thymum, cf. ?v9oç, "bloom"), that is, the 'bloom,' of 'copper pyrites' (chalcitis), whence among Latin speakers it is called 'copper bloom.' It is made now in many regions: at one time, in Spain, it was made in wells or pools having that kind of water, which they boiled down and poured into wooden vats, hanging over them cords kept taut with stones. A mud-like substance would adhere to the cords in the form of glassy berries, and thus precipitated it would be dried for thirty days.
10. But it is now produced elsewhere in caves, because, having collected as a liquid, it drips down there and solidifies into 'grape clusters.' It also occurs in hollow trenches, from whose sides the hanging drops coalesce; it is also made, like salt, under the most blazing sun. Its power is so concentrated that, when sprinkled into the mouths of lions and bears, they are unable to bite because of its astringent force.
iii. Common stones (De lapidus vulgaribus) 1. A 'stone' is generally differentiated from an 'earth' inas- much as it is denser. And it is called stone (lapis) because it hurts (laedere) the foot (pes). Stones are smooth and dispersed; while rocks (saxum) cling together and are split from the mountains. Petra (i.e. another word for 'rock') is a Greek word. Flint (silex) is a hard stone, so named because fire is said to leap out (exsilire) from it. 2. A crag (scopulus) of projecting rock is so called as if from 'looking out' (speculari), or from the sheltering of ships,
from the term omsp?tv ("to shelter"). The Greek word op?2atov is 'cave,' spelunca in Latin. It is a hollow place in a cliff. 3. Crepido (i.e. a projection, promontory) is a broken-off extremity of rock, whence a height of sheer rock is called crepido, as in (Vergil, Aen. 10.361):
Foot (pes) presses close against foot. 
Cautes are sharp rocks in the sea, named from the need to be wary of them, as if they were 'watched out for' (cau- tus). A murex (i.e.a pointed rock, lit.a prickly shellfish) is a rock on the shore similar to the living murex; they are extremely sharp and dangerous for ships. 4. An icon is a rock that, by capturing the sound of the human voice, imitates the words of someone speaking. It is icon in Greek and 'image' (imago) in Latin, because an image of someone else's speech is produced in response to one's voice. However, this may also be the effect of the nature of some locales, especially valleys.
5. A pebble is a small stone mingled with the earth, round and very hard, and very smooth due to its com- plete purity. And it is called 'pebble' (calculus) because it is 'trod on' (calcare) without giving any trouble due to its small size. Its opposite is the scrupus,a small sharp stone that causes injury and troubles the mind if it should fall into one's shoe. For this reason we call something that is a trouble to the mind a 'scruple' (scrupulus); hence also 'pointed' (scrupeus) stones, that is, sharp ones. 6. The whetstone (cos, gen. cotis; lit. "sharp rock"a variant form of cautes above) takes its name because it sharp- ens (acuere) a blade for cutting, for in the Greek lan- guage 'cutting' is called cotis. Some whetstones require water for sharpening and others oil, but oil makes the edge smooth, while water renders it extremely sharp. 7. Pumice (pumex) is so named because it has solidified with the density of foam (spuma), and it is dry, with little luster, and possessing so great a quality of cooling that when it is placed in a vat new wine stops bubbling.
8. Workmen call stones that are crushed and mixed with limestone rudus (lit. "rubble"). These stones are
poured out in making pavement, whence they are called rudus (cf. rudis, "coarse"). 9. Gypsum (gypsum) is related to limestone; it is a Greek term (i.e. yáyoç). There are many varieties, and the best of all is from specularis lapis (i.e. a kind of transparent stone). It is most pleasing for the molded figures and cornices of buildings. 10. Lime- stone (calx) is said to be alive, because even when it has become cold to the touch it still retains some fire con- cealed inside, so that when water is poured on it the hid- den fire bursts forth. It has this marvelous characteristic: once it has been set on fire, it burns in water, which usually extinguishes fire, and it is extinguished in oil, which usually kindles fire. Its use is essential in the prac- tice of architecture, for one stone does not cling firmly to another unless they are joined by limestone. Lime- stone from hard white stone is better for construction; from soft stone it is better for plastering. 11. Sand (arena, i.e. harena) is named from 'dryness' (ariditas), not from 'cementing' (adhaerere) building materials, as some peo- ple would have it. The test of its quality is if it grates when squeezed in one's hand, or if it leaves behind no stain when sprinkled on white cloth.
iv. More important stones (De lapidus insignioribus)
1. The magnet (magnes) is a stone of India, named after its discoverer, for it was first found in India, clinging to the nails of his sandals and the point of his staff, when a certain Magnes was grazing his herds. Afterwards it was found in various places. Its color is like iron, but it is identified by test when, set next to iron, it grabs the iron. It clings to iron so firmly that it will makea chain of finger-rings; for this reason common people call it 'living iron.' 2. It is also believed to attract molten glass as it does iron. Its force is so great that the most blessed Augustine reports (City of God 21.4) that someone held this mag- netic stone beneath a silver dish, and then placed a piece of iron on the silver, and then, by moving the magnetic stone underneath with his hand, immediately moved the iron above. Hence it happens that in a certain temple an iron cult-statue seems to hang in the air. There is another magnet stone in Ethiopia that repels and rejects all iron. The deeper blue a magnet stone, the better it is.
3. Jet (gagates) is a stone first discovered in Sicily, cast out from the waters of the river Gagatis, whence it is named, although it is more plentiful in Britain. It is black, flat, and smooth, and burns when moved near to a flame. The inscriptions it makes on earthenware are indelible.
It drives away snakes when it is burned. It reveals those who are possessed by demons, and it signals the presence of virginity, and, amazingly, it is set alight by water and extinguished by oil. 4. Asbestos is a stone from Arcadia, the color of iron; it was assigned its name from 'fire' because once set alight it is never extinguished. From this stone human art constructed a certain device that pagans, deceived by sacrilege, would marvel at. In short, there was a shrine of Venus in a certain temple precinct, and there was a candelabrum there with a lamp upon it burning in the open air in such a way that no storm or tempest could extinguish it. 5. Pyrite (pyrites) is a yellow Persian stone that mimics the qualities of bronze; it has a great deal of fire in it inasmuch as it gives off sparks easily. It burns the hand of anyone holding it if he squeezes it tightly. For this reason it takes its name from 'fire' (cf. pup). There is another, common, pyrite, which people call 'living stone.' It gives off sparks when struck by iron or by stone. These sparks may be caught by sulfur or various fungi or leaves, and it starts a fire quicker than one can speak. Common people call this the 'hearth rock.'
6. Selenite (selenites) is translated into Latin as 'lunar stone,' because people say its interior glow waxes and wanes with the moon (cf. o?2?v?, 'moon'). It comes from Persia. 7. Dionysius is a dark stone speckled with red spots. It is named thus because if it is ground and mixed with water it smells like wine, and, what is marvelous about it, it fights off drunkenness. 8. Thracius is blackand resonant; it originates in the river in Equitia whose name is Pontus. 9. The stone Phrygius takes its name from the place, for it originates in Phrygia. It has a pale color and is moderately heavy. It has a porous composition. After having first been drenched with wine and blown on with bellows, it is burned until it turns red and is extinguished again with sweet wine three times in succession, so that it is useful for dying cloth. 10. Syrius stone is named after Syria, where it is found. It is said to be buoyant when it is whole, and to sink when it is broken up.
11. Arabicus is similar to ivory without any marks. When rubbed on a whetstone it gives off a liquid of a saffron color. 12. The Iudaicus stone is white and shaped like an acorn; it has evenly-spaced lines, one under the next, that the Greeks call ypaµµ? ("line"). 13. The stone Samius is named after the island Samos where it is found; it is heavy and white, and useful for polishing gold. 14. Memphitis is named from a place in Egypt (i.e.
Memphis); it has the nature of a gem. When ground and mixed with vinegar and smeared on those parts of the body that have to be burned or cut it makes them so numb that they do not feel pain. 15. Sarcophagus stone is so named because within forty days it consumes the body of a deceased person placed in it, for oopóç in Greek means "funerary ark" and ??ay?±v is "to eat" (see VIII.xi.85 and cf. XV.xi.2). It originates in the region of Troy, and is easily split along a line of cleavage. In the East there are rocks of the same kind, which eat away the body when bound even to living people. 16. Haematite (haematites), gentler in that it preserves rather than corrodes the body, is so named because when ground by a whetstone it turns the color of blood (cf. a³µa, 'blood'). It is otherwise a dark bluish color; also purplish. It comes from the far reaches of Egypt, from Babylonia, and from Spain.
17. Androdamantus is black in color, noted for its heav- iness and hardness, whence it takes its name (cf. ?v6paç 6aµ?S?tv, "subdue men"; ?6?µaç, "adamant"). It is chiefly found in Africa. It is said to attract silver and bronze to itself, and, like haematite, it turns the color of blood when ground up. 18. Schistos is found in the far reaches of Spain; it is similar to saffron in color, with a light gleam, and is easily broken. 19. Amiantos (i.e. asbestos) was so named by the ancients because, if cloth was made from it, the cloth resisted fire, and even when placed in the fire did not burn, but acquired a radiant glow. It is similar to split alum, resistant to all poisons, especially those of magicians. 20. Batrachites is easily split into layers, like a potsherd. Galactites is ashy in color and pleasant to the taste; it is so named because when it is ground up it emits a milky substance (cf. y?2a, gen. y?2amtoç, "milk"). 21. Obsidian (opsius) is a black translucent stone with a resemblance to glass. It is used as mirrors on walls, to reflect shadowy images. Many people make gems from it. It originates in India and in Samnium in Italy. Mithridax is a stone from the Euphrates that sparkles with various colors when struck by the sun.
22. Aetites are stones found in the nests of eagles (cf.
??tóç, 'eagle'). People say that they are found in pairs, male and female, and that eagles do not reproduce with- out them. The masculine is hard, like the gall-nut, and
ruddy, while the feminine is small and soft. When these stones are joined together they speed the birth process, and even on some occasions remove part of the womb, unless they are quickly taken away from those giving birth. 23. Phengites is a Cappadocian stone, hard like marble, white and translucent. A temple was once built out of it by a certain king; it had golden doors and when they were closed it was as bright as day inside.
24. Chemites is similar to ivory. They say Darius was buried in it; it is like Parian marble in whiteness and hardness, but much less heavy. It is termed 'porous.' 25. Ostracites is so called because it resembles a potsherd (cf. ootpamov, "potsherd"); it is used in place of pumice. 26. The stone melanites is so called because it exudes a sweet honeyed (melleus) fluid. 27. The stone emery (smyris) is rough and impervious and abrades everything; gems are ground with this stone. 28. Chrysites, similar to ocher in color, is found in Egypt. 29. Hammites is similar to natron, but harder; it originates in Egypt and in Arabia.
30. Thyites comes from Ethiopia; it is greenish, but milky when ground, and extremely biting. 31. Coranus is white and harder than Parian marble. 32. Molotius, greenish and heavy, is found in Egypt. 33. Tusculanus, named for the place in Italy, is said to be shattered by fire. 34. Sabinus, which is dark, becomes bright when oil is added to it, according to report. There is also a certain green Sabinus stone extremely resistant to fire. 35. Siphnius is soft and white. When heated with oil it turns black and grows hard. 36. Stones may also be suitable for physicians' mortars and for pigments; etesius especially, and then chalazius, but thebaicus and basanites are stones that yield nothing of themselves. 37. Transparent stone (specularis, i.e. used for windows) is so named because it is translucent like glass. It was first discovered in the nearer part of Spain, around the city of Segorbe. It is found underground and is cut once it is dug out, and split into as fine a sheet as you like.
v. Marble (De marmoribus) 1. After the types of stones we shall come to marble. There is a difference between stone and marble; exceptional stones that are prized for their markings and colors are called 'marble.' Marble (marmor) is a Greek word (i.e. µ?pµapoç, and cf. µap- µa(c)p?tv, "gleam, sparkle") so named from 'greenness,' and although the other colors were discovered later,
people continued to use the original name from the idea of greenness. 2. The colors and kinds of marble are beyond counting. Not all are quarried from rock, but many are scattered beneath the ground, including the most precious kinds, such as green Lacedaemo- nian, the most delightful of all, first discovered by the Lacedaemonians; hence its name. 3. Ophite (ophites) has markings similar to a snake's, whence it takes its name (cf. o??tç, "snake"). Two kinds occur: a soft white kind and a hard black kind. 4. Augustean and Tiberian marble were first found in Egypt during the reigns of Augus- tus and of Tiberius. They are different from ophite in that ophite, as we said above, has markings like a snake, while these have markings combined in a different way - for Augustean markings are undulating and curled into whorls, while Tiberian are of gray that is spotty and not swirled.
5. Porphyry (porphyrites) in Egypt is reddish with scat- tered white spots. The reason for its name is that it is red, like the color of shell-fish dye (purpura; cf. pop??áp?oç, "purple"). 6. Basanites has the color and hardness of iron, whence this name is given to it (cf. ß?oavoç, "touch- stone"). It is found in Egypt and Ethiopia. 7. Alabas- trites is a white stone, tinted here and there with various colors. The ointment box spoken of by the Evangelist himself was made out of alabastrites (Luke 7:37), for peo- ple hollow out this stone for ointment vessels because it is said to be the best material for preserving oint- ments unspoiled. Particularly white alabaster originates around Thebes in Egypt and Damascus in Syria, but the highest quality comes from India. 8. Parian marble, also called lygdinus, is exceptionally white. It originates on the island Paros, whence it is called Parian. Its size is no larger than that of plates and wine bowls, and it is well suited for unguents. 9. Coralliticus is found in Asia, measuring not more than two cubits, close to ivory in its whiteness and a certain similar appearance. On the other hand, alabandicus is black, and is called by the name of its land. It is purplish in appearance. In the East this stone is melted by fire and cast to function like glass.
10. Thebaicus marble, spotted with golden drops, is found in a region assigned to Egypt. It is suited by a kind of natural utility to be used for small mortars for the grinding of eye-salves. 11. Syenites originates around Syene or Thebes. Kings made building beams from it.
12. There are also marbles that originate in quarries and cliffs. Among these, Thasian is distinguished by its spots
of various colors; it was first used on the Cyclades islands.
13. Lesbian marble is slightly more bluish than Thasian, but also has spots of various colors. 14. Corinthian is sim- ilar to drops of ammoniac gum with a variety of different colors. It was first found in Corinth. Huge columns and lintels and beams are made from it. 15. Caristean marble is green, and excellent. It takes its name from its appear- ance, because it is soothing (gratus; perhaps cf. y?ptç, "grace") to gem-carvers since its color refreshes the eye.
16. Numidia exports Numidian marble. At its sur- face it releases a moisture colored like saffron, whence it takes its name (perhaps cf. vUµ??a(c)a, "yellow water-lily"; váµ???, "water"). It is fit for use as blocks and lintels, but not for inlaid panels. 17. Lucullean marble comes from the island of Melos. The consul Lucullus, who was delighted with it and first brought it to Rome, provided it its name. It is almost the only marble to take its name from an admirer. 18. There is also a marble called Lunen- sis. (i.e. Carrara marble). Tephrias is named from the color of ashes (cf. ts??pa, "ashes"). This stone is praised as a protection against serpents when it is worn bound on. 19. Ivory (ebur) is named after the barrus, that is, the elephant. Horace (Epodes 12.1) says:
Woman most deserving of black elephants (barrus), what do you mean?
vi. Gems (De gemmis) 1. After the types of marble, we proceed to gems. They add great beauty to gold with their loveliness of color. Their origins are in the Caucasian cliffs. Legend claims that Prometheus first enclosed a piece of gemstone in iron and encircled his finger with it; from these beginnings rings and gemstones originated. 2. There are said to be innumerable kinds of gems. Of these we have noted only the principal or most famous ones. Gems (gemma) are so called because they are translu- cent like resin (gummi). They are called precious stones because they are valued dearly, or because they can be distinguished from base stones, or because they are rare - for everything that is rare is called great and precious, as may be read in the book of Samuel (cf. I Kings 3:1 Vulgate): "And the word of the Lord was precious in Israel"; that is, it was rare.
vii. Green gems (De viridioribus gemmis) 1. Of all green gems, the smaragdus (i.e. emeralds, etc.) holds pre- eminence. The ancients assigned it third place in value
after the pearl and the unio (i.e. a type of pearl, see x.1 below). The smaragdus is named from its extreme green- ness, for everything that is very green is called 'bitter' (amarus). No gem or plant possesses greater intensity than the smaragdus; it exceeds green plants and leaves and imbues the reflected air around it with greenness. Nothing is more soothing to the eyes of gem cutters than this refreshing green. If its surface is broad, it reflects images like a mirror. Indeed the Emperor Nero used to watch gladiator matches using a smaragdus. 2. There are twelve kinds of smaragdus: the Scythian smaragdus, found among the Scythian people, is the noblest. The Bactrian smaragdus holds second place; they are gath- ered in seams of rock when the north wind blows, for at that time they glitter in the ground, which is uncov- ered because the sands are shifted a great deal by these winds. Egyptian smaragdi hold third place. The rest are found in copper mines, but they are flawed, for they have markings like bronze or lead or hair-line streaks or salt. Smaragdi improve with undiluted wine and green oil, however much they have been naturally stained.
3. Chalcosmaragdos is so named because it is green and mottled with copper veins (cf. ya2móç, "copper"). It originates in Egypt and the island of Cyprus. 4. Pra- sius is named for its green color (cf. ppaoÛ6?ç, "leek- green"), but it is a base stone. Another variety of it is marred by blood-like spots. A third variety is distin- guished by its three white lines. 5. Beryl (beryllus) orig- inates in India, deriving its name from the language of the people of India. It is similar to a smaragdus in its greenness, but with a pale color. The Indians cut it into hexagonal shapes, so that its dull color is enhanced by the reflections of the faces; if cut in another way, it has no gleam. There are nine varieties. 6. Chrysoberyllus is so named because its pale greenness glitters with a golden gleam (cf. ypáo?oç, "golden"). India is also the source for this gem. 7. Chrysoprase (Chrysoprasus) is an Indian stone, with a color . . . recalling that of the sap of a leek, with intervening gold spots, whence it took its name (cf. ypUoóç, "gold"; pp?oov, "leek"). Some people have considered it as a type of beryl.
8. Jasper (iaspis) is translated from the Greek into Latin as "green gem," for ias means "green" and pinasin
means "gem." It is somewhat like a smaragdus, but with a dull color. There are seventeen varieties. Some people think the gemstone jasper provides good fortune and protection to pregnant women - but this belief belongs not to faith but to superstition. 9. Topazion is one of the green kinds of gem, and glitters with all colors. It was first found in an island of Arabia, where Troglodyte ban- dits, worn out by hunger and storms, unearthed it when they dug out the roots of plants. When it was sought afterward, this island was covered with clouds, but was finally found by sailors. It is from this that both place (i.e. the island Topazus in the Red Sea) and gem took their name; for in the Troglodyte language top?S?tv has the meaning "seek" (cf. Greek top?S?tv, "seek"). This is the most abundant gemstone; it alone of the precious stones is subjected to the polishing file. There are two kinds.
10. Callaica is green in color, but pale and exceedingly cloudy. Nothing more pleasantly beautifies (cf. m?22oç, "beauty") gold, whence it is named. It originates in India and Germany in icy cliffs, and it sticks out like eyes.
11. Malachite (molochites), more densely green and duller than a smaragdus, takes its name from the color of the mallow (malva), and is valued for the seals it makes. It originates in Arabia. 12. Heliotrope (heliotropia) is green in color and cloudy; it is strewn with reddish stars and has blood-colored veins. The reason for this stone's name is from its effect, for when it is thrown into a bronze basin it changes the rays of the sun with a blood-colored reflection (cf. ?2toç, "sun"; tpop?, "change"), but when out of the water it receives sunlight like a mirror, and reveals an eclipse of the sun by showing the advancing moon. This stone also provides a most blatant example of the shamelessness of magicians, because they claim that someone carrying an herb blended with a heliotrope, once certain spells have been cast, cannot be seen. It originates in Cyprus and Africa, but the better heliotrope is from Ethiopia.
13. Sagda is a gem with a leek-green color, found among the Chaldeans. It has such power that from the ocean depths it seeks passing ships, and clings so tena- ciously to the hulls that it can hardly be removed without scraping away part of the wood. 14. Myrrhites is so named because it has the color of myrrh. When it is compressed until it becomes warm it exudes the sweet smell of nard.
Aromatitis is found in Arabia and Egypt; it has the color and scent of myrrh, whence it takes its name (cf. aroma, "spice"). 15. Melichros is two-colored; one part being green and the other like honey (mel). 16. Choaspitis is named from a Persian river (i.e. the Choaspes, present- day Karkheh) and has a greenish-gold gleam.
viii. Red gems (De rubris gemmis) 1. Coral is formed in the sea and has a branching shape. It has a greenish color, but is mostly red. Its 'berries' are white and soft while underwater; once they are taken out they immedi- ately harden and turn red, and quickly become stone-like to the touch. Coral is usually caught and pulled out in nets, or cut out with a sharp (acer) knife, whence it is called 'coral' (corallius; cf. moupoç, "loppings"). Coral is as priceless in India as Indian pearls are among us here. Magicians claim that coral can repel lightning, if this may be believed. 2. Carnelian (sardius) is so named because it was first found by the Sardinians. It has a red color superior to marble, but among gems it is quite base. There are five kinds of carnelian. 3. Onyx (onyx) is so named because it possesses a white layer mixed in it that is similar to the human nail. For the Greeks call the nail ovU(. India and Arabia produce these gems, but the two types are distinct from each other, for Indian onyx has sparkles in white encircling bands, while Arabian onyx is black with white bands. There are five kinds of onyx.
4. Sardonyx is so called from a combination of two names, from the luster of onyx and from carnelian (sardius). It consists of three colors; the base is black, the middle is white and the upper layer is cinnabar-red. Only this stone removes none of the wax when making a seal. It is found in India and Arabia when it is uncov- ered by rushing water. There are five kinds of sardonyx.
5. Haematite (haematites) is blood-red, and is so called for that reason, since the word a³µa means "blood." The chief type occurs in Ethiopia, but is also found in Arabia and in Africa. In regard to haematite magicians make some promise about its revealing any ambushes of the barbarians.
6. Amber (sucinus), which the Greeks call ?2?mtpov, has the color of tawny wax, and is said to be the sap (sucus) of trees, and for the reason is called 'amber.' An explanation taken from myth has led it to being called electrum, for the story goes that when Phaethon was killed by a bolt of lightning, his sisters, in their grief, were turned into poplar trees, and they exude amber
(electrum) as tears, year in and out, by the river Eridanus (i.e. the Po); and it is called electrum because many poets said the sun used to be called Elector (the 'Shining One'). But in fact amber is not the sap of the poplar tree but of the pine tree, for when it is burned it gives off the fragrance of pine pitch. 7. It is formed in the islands of the northern Ocean as pine gum, and is solidified like crystal by the cold or by the passage of time. It is used to make beautiful necklaces that are popular with rural women. But some people call it harpaga (lit. "hook") because, once it has received the spirit of heat from being rubbed with the fingers, it attracts leaves and chaff and the fringes of clothing just as a magnet attracts iron. It may be colored in whatever manner you like, for it may be dyed by ox-tongue root and by purple shell-fish dye.
8. The lyncurius is so named because it is formed from lynx urine that has hardened with time. Like amber, it is yellow, and it attracts nearby leaves with its spirit.
ix. Purple gems (De purpureis) 1. Among the pur- ple gems Indian amethyst holds the place of honor. Amethyst (amethystus) is purple with a violet color mixed in; its brilliance is like that of a rose, and it gently gives out a sort of little flame. Another type of amethyst holds a lower place, down to that of the hyacinth-stone. People assert that the reason for its name is that there is something not entirely fire-like in its purple, but that it possesses rather the color of wine (cf. µs9U, "wine"). Amethyst is easily carved. There are five kinds. 2. The sapphire (sapphirus) is blue with purple, possessing scat- tered gold flecks; the finest sapphires are found among the Medes, although sapphires are nowhere truly clear.
3. The hyacinth-stone (iacinthus, probably a sapphire) is named after the flower called hyacinth. It is found in Ethiopia and has a blue color. The finest hyacinth-stone is neither clear nor dulled with opacity but glows and shines purple from both qualities, although this stone is not consistent in its color. In fair weather it is clear and pleasing, while in cloudy weather it loses its strength and fades before one's eyes. When put into the mouth, it is freezing cold. It is very hard to carve, although it is not completely unworkable for it can be incised and engraved with a diamond.
4. Iacinthizonta is from India, and closely resembles the hyacinth-stone. Certain crystals of these, similar to iacinthus, are discolored by crisscrossing veins, and from this flaw comes their name (cf. SÛv?, "stripe").
5. 
Amethystizontas is so named because the sparkle on its surface ranges towards the violet color of amethyst.
6. Chelidonia is named after the color of a swallow (cf. y?2t6Ûv, "swallow"). There are two kinds: one of them is purple on one side, and the other purple with scattered black spots. 7. Cyanea (i.e. a type of lapus lazuli) is a gem from Scythia glittering with a blue sheen, either pure blue, or sometimes varied with flecks of flickering gold.
8. Rhoditis is rosy, and takes its name from this quality (cf. pó6ov, "rose").
x. White gems (De candidis) 1. The pearl is the most excellent of the white gems. People say it is called a pearl (margarita) because this kind of stone is found in shell- fish from the sea (mare), for it consists of a pebble formed in the flesh of a shellfish, like the little stone in the brain of a fish (see section 8 below). It is made from celes- tial dew, which shellfish absorb at a certain season of the year. A certain pearl is called a unio, an apt name because only one (unus) is found at a time, never two or more. White pearls are preferable to those that are yellow. Youth, or the reception of morning dew, makes pearls white; old age, or evening air, produces dark ones.
2. The opal (paederos) holds second place among the white gems, after the pearl. One may ask of this gem under what color it should be classified, given that its name is applied to other sorts of beauty so frequently that it has become merely a term that promises beauty.
3. Asterites is white and contains a light enclosed within it like a star floating about inside. It reflects white rays of sunlight, whence it finds its name (cf. ?ot?p, "star, flame").
4. Galactitis is milky (cf. y?2a, gen. y?2amtoç, "milk"); when rubbed it gives off a white fluid tasting of milk. When tied onto nursing women it makes their breasts productive. It is also said to make an infant's mouth water when it is hung around its neck. It becomes liquid in the mouth and obliterates memory. The rivers Nile and Achelous yield this stone. Some people call a smaragdus banded with white veins a galactitis. 5. Cha- lazias has the shape and whiteness of a hailstone (cf. y?2aSa, "hail"); it is also invincibly hard, like a dia- mond. Even when placed on the fire it retains its cold- ness. 6. Solis is a white gem, and has this name because it casts its rays in the form of the sun (sol) shining on the world. 7. Selenite (selenitis) is translucent with a whitish honey-like gleam; it contains the image of the moon (cf.
o?2?v?, "moon"). People claim that it wanes and waxes on particular days, according to the course of that celes- tial body. It originates in Persia.
8. Cinaedia is found in the brain of a fish with the same name; it is white and oblong. People say that with it they predict calm or storm at sea. 9. Cat's-eye (beli oculus) is white surrounding a black pupil lit from the middle with a golden gleam. Because of its beauty it was dedicated to Belus, king of Assyria, and thus it is named. 10. A white gem is called epimelas when it turns black on the surface, whence it takes its name (cf. sp(c), "upon"; µs2aç, "black"). 11. Exebenus is brilliant and white; goldsmiths use it to polish gold.
xi. Black gems (De nigris) 1. Agate (achates) was first found in Sicily, near the river of the same name, and afterwards in many lands. It is black and has in its middle black and white circles, joined together and variegated, like haemitite. With the fumes of agates magicians, if it may be credited, ward off storms and halt the flow of rivers. 2. Apsyctos is black and heavy, and marked with red veins. When heated by fire, this stone retains the warmth for seven days. 3. Aegyptilla, which is black at the base and blue on the surface, is named after Egypt, where it is found. 4. Media is black, and was discovered by the legendary Medea. It has veins the color of bronze. It gives off saffron-colored moisture and has the flavor of wine.
5. Veientana is an Italian gemstone, found in Veii (i.e. a city in Etruria). It is black on the surface with glittering white spots mingled in it. Bariptos (i.e. baroptenus) is black with blood red and white spots. 6. Mesomelas is black with a vein of any other color streaking through its middle (cf. µsooç, "in the middle"; µs2aç, "black"). The Veneris crinis (lit. "hair of Venus") has the blackest sheen, and has the appearance of red hairs in it. 7. Trichrus, from Africa, is black, but gives off three liquids; black from the base, blood red from the middle, and yellow from the surface. 8. Dionysia is black with mingled red spots. When rubbed with water it smells of wine, and its fragrance is thought to ward off drunkenness. Pyritis, indeed, is black, but it scorches the fingers when it is rubbed against them.
xii. Varicolored gems (De variis) 1. Panchrus is a var- iegated stone exhibiting almost all the colors, hence its name (cf. p?v, "all"; ypÛç, "color"). Olca (i.e. oica),
which has a barbarian name, is yellow, black, green and white. 2. Mithridax (i.e. mithrax) glitters in various col- ors when it is struck by sunlight. It comes from Persia. Drosolithus is a variegated gem. The reason for its name is that if it is placed near the fire it emits something like sweat (cf. 6póooç, "sweat"; 2(c)9oç, "stone"). 3. The opal (opalus) is embellished by the colors of various gem- stones, for it has the rather pale fire of a carbuncle, the sparkling purple of an amethyst, and the glittering green of a smaragdus, all glowing together with a certain var- iegation. It takes its name from the language of its native land (cf. Sanskrit upala, "gem"), for only India produces it. 4. Pontica stones are named after the Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea), and come in different varieties, at one time glittering with blood red spots, at another with gold spots. Some have stars and some are streaked with long lines of color. 5. Hexecontalithos is a multicolored stone of a small size, whence it has taken this name for itself, for it is sprinkled with such a variety of spots that the colors of sixty gemstones are contained in its small orb (cf. s(?movta, "sixty"; 2(c)9oç, "stone"). It occurs in Libya among the Troglodytes. 6. Murra (murrina) is found in Parthia, but especially in Carmania. People think that it is a liquid that has been compressed by the heat under the earth, whence it takes its name. Its varieties occur in purple and white, and it has a fiery look, with reflections of colors such as are seen in a rainbow. Crystal is created by the opposite principle, when there is an extremely strong freezing of ice.
xiii. Crystalline gems (Decrystallinis) 1. Crystal (crys- tallus) is glittering and watery in color. It is said to be snow that has hardened to ice over a period of years, whence the Greeks gave it its name (cf. mpáota22oç, "ice"). It occurs in Asia and Cyprus, and particularly in the northern part of the Alps, where the sun never has its most burning heat, not even in summer. Hence the lengthy and enduring hardness itself produces the spe- cific form that is called 'crystal.' When crystal is placed facing the sun's rays it seizes the flame so that it sets fire to dried fungus or leaves. It is used for cups, although it can handle only cold liquids.
2. The diamond (adamans, i.e. adamas) is a small unsightly stone from India, possessing a rust-like color and the clarity of crystal. It is never found any larger than a hazelnut. It yields to no substance, neither to iron nor to fire, nor does it ever grow warm, whence it takes
its name, which is translated from Greek as 'unconquer- able force' (cf. a- privative + 6aµ?S?tv, "conquer"). But although it is invulnerable to iron and disdainful of fire, it may be split after it has been soaked in warm fresh goat's blood, and thus shattered by many blows from an iron tool. Gem carvers use fragments of diamond for engraving and perforating gemstones. 3. It is so opposed to the magnet that when it is placed near iron it does not allow the iron to be drawn off by the magnet, and if the magnet is moved and grabs the iron, then the dia- mond seizes it back and carries it off. Like amber, it is said to ward off poison, drive away vain fears, and resist malicious witchery. 4. There are six kinds of diamond.
Chalazias (i.e. chalazius) possesses the whiteness and shape of a hailstone (cf. y?2aSa, "hail") and a diamond- like hardness. Even when placed in the fire it retains its coldness. 5. Ceraunium has two kinds. One, which comes from Germania, is like a crystal but is transparent blue, and if placed below the open sky it catches the gleam of the stars. The second ceraunium occurs in Hispania on the Lusitanian shore. It has the color of reddish bronze, and a quality like fire. It is said to be good against the force of lightning, if we may believe it. It is named ceraunium because it is not found anywhere but in a place very close to where a lightning-bolt has struck - for in Greek a lightning-bolt is called m?paUvóç. 6. The iris crystal is found in Arabia in the Red Sea. It is the color of crystal, with six sides. It is called iris (lit. "rainbow") by analogy, for if it is struck by sunlight while indoors it recreates on the walls nearby the shape and colors of the rainbow.
7. Astrion, quite close to crystal, is from India, and in its center a star shines with the gleam of a full moon. It takes its name because when held facing the stars it catches their gleam and casts it back (cf. ?ot?p, "star").
8. Electria, as if the word were alectoria, for it is found in the stomachs of poultry (cf. ?2smtYp, "cock"). It has the appearance of a crystal and the size of a bean. Magicians would have it that this stone makes people invulnerable in battle, if we may believe it. 9. Enhydros is named from water (cf. u6Yp, "water"), for it exudes so much water that you might think there is a gushing fountain closed up in it.
xiv. Fiery gems (De ignitis) 1. Of all the fiery gems, the carbuncle (carbunculus) holds the principal rank. It is called 'carbuncle' because it is fiery, like a coal (carbo), and its gleam is not overcome by the night, for it gives so
much light in the darkness that it casts its flames up to the eye. There are twelve kinds, but the most outstanding are those that seem to glow, as if giving off fire. The carbuncle is called ?v9pa( ("charcoal, carbuncle") in Greek. It occurs in Libya where the Troglodytes live. 2. Anthracitis is so named because it has a fiery color, like the carbuncle, butiscircled withwhiteveins. Acharacteristic of anthracitis is that when thrown into the fire it loses its luster as if it were lifeless, while, on the contrary, it begins to glow when doused in water. 3. Sandasirus occurs in India, at a place with the same name. Gold drops appear to sparkle inside it as if in a transparent flame. It is generally agreed that the greater number of starts, the higher the value. 4. Lychnis belongs to this class of fiery gems, and is so named from the glowing of lamps (cf. 2áyvoç, "lamp"). It occurs in many places, but the most admired variety is found in India. Some people have called it aweaker carbuncle. It has two forms: one that glows purple and another that glows with the redness of scarlet. When heated by the sun or rubbed with the fingers, it is said to draw chaff and scraps of paper to itself. It is resistant to carving, and if it ever is carved, when it is pressed into the seal, it retains part of the wax, like the bite of an animal. It comes in four kinds.
5. Carchedonia is said to behave as lychnis does, although it is much more base than lychnis. It origi- nates among the Nasamones in a divine rain, as they report; it is found by the reflected light of a full moon. Every kind of carchedonia is resistant to carving. 6. Ala- bandina is named after the Alabanda region of Asia. Its color approaches that of the carchedonia, but is less intense. 7. Dracontites (i.e. dracontis) is extracted from the brain of the dragon (draco, gen. draconis). This does not become a gemstone unless it is cut out of living dragons; hence magicians remove it from sleeping drag- ons - for bold men search out the caves of dragons, and sprinkle drugged herbs there to put the dragons to sleep, and when the dragons have been lulled to sleep, they cut off their heads and extract the gemstones. The stones are translucent white. The kings of the East in par- ticular glory in the use of these stones. 8. Chrysoprase (chrysoprasus) is an Ethiopian stone; light conceals it, but darkness reveals it, for at night it is fiery, and golden during the day. 9. Phlogites comes from Persia. It displays something in it like burning flames that do not go out (cf. ??2ó(, gen. ??2oyóç "flame"). 10. Syrtitis is so named
because it was first discovered on the shores of the Syrtes. In the region of Lucania it has a saffron color, and con- tains faint stars inside it that shine in cloudy weather.
11. Hormiscion is considered among the most pleasing gems, glowing with a fiery gold color that carries a white light with it on the edges.
xv. Golden gems (De aureis) 1. Some kinds of gems are named because they look like metals or like stones. 2. Chrysopis appears to be simply gold (cf. ypUoóç, "gold"; ?p?, "appearance"). Chrysolite (chrysolithus, i.e. topaz; cf. 2(c)9oç "stone") is similar to gold, with a resemblance to the color of the sea. Ethiopia produces this gem. 3. Chry- selectrus is similar to gold, but tending towards amber (electrum) in color. It is pleasing, but only when seen in the morning, and is very greedy for fire; if it should be near a fire it quickly begins to glow. 4. Chrysolampis is named from gold and fire (cf. 2aµp?ç, "torch"), for dur- ing the day it is golden, and at night it is fiery. Ethiopia produces this gem. 5. Ammochrysus is sand mixed with gold, having tiny cubes partly of gold leaf and partly of dust. It occurs in Persia. 6. Leucochrysus has white veins with a golden color coming between. Melichrysus is so named because this gem allows light to pass through it as if it were pure honey (mel) seen through gold.
7. Chrysocolla occurs in India, where ants dig out gold. It is similar to gold and has the nature of a magnet, except that it is also reported to increase (i.e. coagulate) gold, whence also it is named (cf. mo22?v, "bond together"). Argyritis is similar to silver (cf. ?pyUpoç, "silver"), with golden spots. 8. Androdamas has the gleam of silver and is nearly a diamond. It always occurs squared off into cubes. Magicians think that its name was assigned because it is said to calm and restrain passions and rages of the soul, if we may believe it (cf. ?v6po6?µaç, "man- taming," and iv.17 above). It is found by the Red Sea.
9. Chalcitis is the color of bronze (cf. ya2móç, "copper, bronze"). Chalcophonos is black, but when struck with a stone it rings like bronze (cf. ??Yv?, "sound"). 10. Bal- anites comes in two kinds; one greenish, and one similar to Corinthian bronze, divided in the middle bya vein of flame.
11. Sideritis does not differ in appearance from iron. However it is introduced into magical practices, it arouses disagreement. 12. The 'dactylus of Ida' is from the island of Crete. It is iron-colored. The reason for its name is because it resembles a human thumb (cf. 6?mtU2oç,
"finger"). 13. Aethiopicus is the color of iron, and when it is rubbed it exudes a black liquid. 14. Zmilanthus (i.e. zmilampis) is collected in the channel of the Euphrates and is similar to Proconnesian marble, with a gray color in the middle shining like the pupil of the eye. Arabica, namedafteritsnativecountry, is like ivoryinappearance.
15. Hephaestitis has the property of a mirror in reflecting images, although it makes them reddish. The test of this gem is if, when added to boiling water, it immediately chills it or if, when placed in the sun, it ignites dry mate- rial. It originates in Corycus. 16. Ostracites is stone-like in color, and harder than a shell (cf. ostrea, "oyster"). Another type is similar to agate, except that polishing makes agate shiny. It has such strength of hardness that other gems are carved using its fragments. 17. Glossope- tra is like the human tongue and took its name for this reason (cf. y2?ooa, "tongue"; pstpoç, "rock"). It is said to drop from the sky when the moon is waning. Magi- cians attribute no small amount of power to it, for they suppose that by means of it the moon can be made to move.
18. There are also certain kinds of gemstones that are named from animals: echites (cf. echidna 'adder') exhibits viperish spots; carcinias is the color of a sea crab (cancer; cf. mapm(c)voç, "crab"). 19. Scorpitis resem- bles a scorpion (scorpio) in both color and appearance. Myrmecitis imitates the appearance of a crawling ant (cf. µápµ?(, "ant"). Taos is similar to a peacock (cf. taÛç, "peacock"); hieracitis has the color of a hawk (cf. ¬spa(, "hawk"); aetitis, the color of an eagle (cf. ??tóç, "eagle"); aegophthalmos looks like a goat's eye (cf. a­(, gen. a"yóç, "goat," ò??9a2µóç, "eye"). 20. Lycopthalmos has four col- ors - it is orange-red and blood-red, and in the middle it surrounds black with white, like the eyes of wolves (cf. 2ámoç, "wolf"). Meconites resembles a poppy (cf. µ?mYv, "poppy").
21. There are also some gemstones that the pagans use in certain superstitions. 22. They maintain that when liparea is burned it is capable of calling all animals. They say that anancitis calls out the images of demons during the practice of hydromancy. They claim that with syn- ochitis spirits summoned up from below may be con- trolled. 23. Chelonitis is the eye of an Indian turtle. It is a varicolored purple. Magicians imagine that with this placed on the tongue, one may predict the future. 24. Brontea, from the head of the turtle, is thought to fall from thunder (cf. ßpovt?, "thunder") and to counteract
the lightning-bolt. 25. The hyena-stone (hyaenia) is found in the eye of that beast, the hyena (hyaena). If this stone is placed under a person's tongue, they say he predicts the future. But coral (corallius) is also said to guard against storms and hail. 26. Pontica is a certain gemstone that is transparently blue. It has reddish stars, and sometimes golden ones as well. People say that they can question demons and drive them away by means of this stone.
27. For certain kinds of gemstone it is very difficult to distinguish the genuine from the false, especially once someone has discovered how to transmute a genuine specimen of one gem into a false specimen of other gems - for example, sardonyx, which is made from three gemstones joined together so that they cannot be taken apart. People artificially construct these from various kinds: black, white, and cinnabar-colored. As a substi- tute for that most precious stone, the smaragdus, some people dye glass with skill, andits false greenness deceives the eyes with a certain subtlety, to the point that there is no one who may test it and demonstrate that it is false. It is the same with other matters in one way or another, for there is no mortal life free from deception. 28. All of the gems that are not translucent are called 'blind,' because they are made opaque by their density.
xvi. Glass (De vitro) 1. Glass (vitrum) is so called because with its transparency it transmits light to one's sight (visus). Anything contained inside other minerals is hidden, but any sort of liquid or visible thing contained in glass is displayed to the outside; although closed up, in a certain way the contents are revealed.
This was the origin of glass: in the part of Syria called Phoenicia there is a swamp bordering on Judea around the base of Mt. Carmel; the river Belus rises from this place and flows over a distance of five miles into the sea near the city Ptolemais, and its sands are cleansed of their impurities by this rushing flood. 2. Report has it that a ship belonging to natron merchants was driven there, and when these merchants went to prepare their meals here and there along the shore, they brought out clumps of natron from the ship, since there weren't any stones to support the cooking vessels. When the sand of the shore mixed with these burning natron clumps, translucent streams of a strange liquid began to flow, and this was the origin of glass. 3. Since invention is ingenious, it did not long remain content with natron alone, but was
eager [to embellish] this craft with other mixtures. Thus glass is heated by pieces of light dry wood, and when copper and natron are added with continuous firing so that the copper is melted, lumps of glass are produced. Afterwards, in workshops, the lump is melted again, and one sort of glass is formed by blowing, another turned on a lathe, and another is engraved like silver. Glass is also colored in many ways so that it may imitate hyacinth- stones, sapphires, green stones, and onyx, and the colors of other gems. There is no other material more fit for mirrors or more suitable for painting.
4. The highest esteem is granted to clear glass with its close similarity to crystal, whence glass has replaced the metals silver and gold for drinking vessels. It used to be made in Italy. Throughout Gaul and Spain the softest white sand would be ground with a mortar and pestle, and then mixed with three parts, by weight or measure, of natron, and after being melted it would be poured into another furnace. This lump would be called ammonitrum (i.e. hammonitrum). When heated again it would become pure, clear glass. 5. The stone obsidian (obsianus) is counted as a type of glass. Sometimes it is green and sometimes black, and it is translucent. It looks rather dull and when used as a wall mirror it reflects shadows instead of images. Many people make gems out of it. People say that this stone occurs in India and Italy and in Spain near the Ocean.
6. They claim that under Tiberius Caesar a certain craftsman devised a formula for glass so that it would be flexible and pliable. And when he was brought before Caesar he presented a drinking bowl to him, and Caesar indignantly threw it to the floor. The craftsman picked the drinking bowl up from the floor, where it had been dented as a bronze vessel would be. Then he took a small hammer from his pocket and reshaped the drink- ing bowl. When he had done this, Caesar said to him, "Does anyone else know this method of making glass?" After the craftsman swore that no one else knew, Caesar ordered him beheaded, lest, if this skill became known, gold would be regarded as mud and the value of all met- als would be reduced - and it is true that if glass vessels became unbreakable, they would be better than gold and silver.
xvii. Metals (De metallis) Metal (metallum) is named from the Greek word µ?ta22?v ("search," "seek after other things," seen asderived from µ?t? "after" and?22a
"other things") because its nature is such that wherever one vein has appeared, there is hope for seeking out another in that place. There are seven kinds of metals: gold, silver, copper, electrum, tin, lead, and, what dom- inates everything, iron.
xviii. Gold (De auro) 1. Gold (aurum) is named from 'gleam' (aura), that is, from its luster, because it gleams more when the air reflects it. Whence Vergil says (Aen. 6.204):
From which the contrasting gleam (aura) of gold (aurum) shone through the branches,
that is, the luster of gold, for it is natural for the luster of metal to gleam more when it is reflected with another light. Hence also patrons (aurarius) are named; their glittering renown makes others resplendent. 2. Obryzum gold (i.e. pure gold) is so called because it shines forth (obradiare) lustrously. It has the best color, which the Hebrews call ophaz and the Greeks mtppóç ("orange- tawny"). The thinnest sheets of gold are called gold leaf (brattea, i.e. bractea), from the term ßp?µ?tov, which is onomatopoeic for 'clanging,' or from ßpatUv sheets (perhaps cf. ßpay?±v, "clash").
3. Money (pecunia) first had its name and actual char- acter from livestock (pecus), for coins used to be cut from hides and then embossed. After this, bronze coinage was invented by Saturn, for it was he who devised the stamp- ing and marking of coins. 4. For this reason the public treasury was dedicated to Saturn by the pagans. Others, as mentioned above, named money after livestock, just as beasts of burden (iumentum) are named after 'help- ing' (iuvare), for among the ancients every inheritance was called peculium from the livestock (pecus) of which their entire property consisted. Whence also someone who was rich would be called a pecuarius (lit. "cattle- man"), but now, pecuniosus ("moneyed"). 5. The most ancient people made use of bronze, since gold and sil- ver had not yet been discovered. Bronze (aes, gen. aeris) money came into use first, then silver, and finally gold followed, but money still retained its name from the metal with which it began (i.e. aes continued to mean 'money' as well as 'bronze'). Hence also the public trea- sury (aerarium) was named, because at first only bronze
was used, and it alone was hoarded, since gold and silver were not yet coined. Afterwards money might be made of whatever of these metals you chose, but the term aer- arium remained, from that metal whence money had its origin.
6. 'Treasury' (thesaurus) is named after the Greek term 9sotç, "positing," that is, "deposit." Thus 9sotç means "positing," and the term has combined a Greek with a Latin word, for the element 9?ç means "deposit" in Greek, and Latin supplies aurum ("gold"), so that the word thesaurus sounds like the combination 'gold deposit.' An auraria (i.e. a kind of tax; also a gold mine) takes its name from gold (aurum). 7. But tribute (tributa) is named because earlier it used to be exacted from each of the tribes (tribus), just as now it is exacted from each of the territories. The Roman people were divided into three groups so that those who were preeminent in each group were called 'tribunes' (tribunus), whence they also named the payments that the people gave 'tributes.' 8. A vectigal (i.e. a type of tax) is a tribute, named from 'conveying' (vehere, ppl. vectus). A stipend (stipendium) is named from 'payment that is to be weighed' (stips pendenda), for the ancients were accustomed to weigh money out instead of counting it.
Coinage (moneta) is so called because it 'gives warn- ing' (monere, 3rd person monet) lest some fraud be com- mitted with either the metal or the weight. 9.A nomisma is a gold, silver, orbronze solidus, and it is called nomisma because it is stamped with the names (nomen, gen. nomi- nis) and images of rulers. The coin was first called by the word ?pyUpoç ("silver"), because it was struck mostly from silver (argentum). 10. But coins (nummus) are now named after Numa, a king of the Romans, who was first among the Latins to emboss them with images and mark them with his own name. 11. Change (follis, lit. "leather bellows, money bag") is named from the small sack in which it is kept, that which is contained being named by its container. 12. Three things are necessary in coinage: a metal, a shape, and a weight. If something lacks any of these, it is not coinage.
13. There are three kinds of silver, gold, and bronze: stamped, worked, and unworked. Stamped is the kind found in coins; worked, the kind found in vessels and signets; unworked, the kind found in nuggets - a nugget is also called 'a heavy thing' (grave, i.e.a weight). The idea of forming metals in molds came about in this way, when by some chance a forest fire scorched the earth, which
poured out streams of melted ore in some form. 14. This was either bronze or gold. When the metal flowed into the depressions in the ground, it took on the shape in which either the flowing stream or the collecting hol- low had formed it. Captivated by the splendor of these objects, people picked up these lumps that had been held fast and saw in them the imprints molded from the ground, and from this realized that metals, when melted, could be made into any shape.
xix. Silver (De argento) 1. The word 'silver' (argentum) is not very different from its Greek name, for the Greeks call it ?pyápoç. It possesses this marvelous quality, that, although it is white, when it is rubbed against a body it leaves black lines. 2. Quicksilver (argentum vivum) is so called because it etches out the materials onto which it is thrown. This is also classified as a liquid because it flows. It is particularly found in mines or in silver-working furnaces, clinging to the roof in condensed drops, and often even in the oldest excrement of sewers or the slime of wells. It is also made from cinnabar placed on an iron crucible covered with an earthenware lid. When the vessel is sealed, coals are placed around it and thus quicksilver is distilled from cinnabar. Without it neither silver nor bronze can be gilded. 3. It has such great power that if you place a one hundred pound rock on top of a sextarium (i.e. about a pint) of quicksilver, it steadfastly sustains the rock. But if, on the other hand, you place a mere gram of gold on top of it, it quickly yields to the gold's light weight by forming a hollow. From this we may understand that it is not the weight of a substance, but rather its nature, to which quicksilver yields. It is best kept in glass vessels, for it eats through other materials. When given in a drink, it causes death due to its weight.
4. The dross of silver is called 2t9?pyUpoç, and we call it the 'froth of silver' (i.e. lead monoxide or litharge). It is made in this way from silver and lead.
xx. Bronze (De aere) 1. Bronze (aes, gen. aeris) is named from its gleaming in the 'air' (aer, gen. aeris), just as gold (aurum) and silver (argentum) are. The ancients used bronze before they used iron. Indeed, at first they would plow the earth with bronze; with bronze weapons they would wage war; and bronze was more prized, while gold and silver were rejected as useless. Now it is the opposite (Lucretius, On the Nature of Things 5.1275):
Bronze is despised and gold has attained the highest honor: thus time in its turning changes the positions of things, and what was prized becomes finally without value.
The use of bronze later spread to statues, vessels, and the construction of buildings. Public proclamations in par- ticular were written on bronze plaques for a permanent record.
2. Cyprian bronze (i.e. copper) was first found on the island of Cyprus, whence it was named. It is made from a bronze-like stone that they call cadmia, and it is mal- leable. If lead is added to it, it turns purple. 3. Aurichal- cum is so called because it possesses the splendor of gold (aurum) and the hardness of bronze. Its name is com- posed from both the Latin and Greek languages, for the Greeks call bronze ya2móç. Moreover it is made from bronze and a great deal of fire, and it is brought to a gold color by means of additives. 4. Corinthian bronze is a mixture of all metals, which was first mixed acci- dentally when Corinth was burned after being captured. When Hannibal had captured this city, he gathered all the bronze and gold and silver statues into a single pyre and burned them. Workmen carried this mixture off and made plates. Thus Corinthian vessels were created from all the metals (i.e. gold, silver, and bronze) combined to make a single alloy that was neither one particular metal nor another. Hence even up to the present day things made either of this substance or of an imitation of it are called 'Corinthian bronze' or 'Corinthian vessels." There are three kinds: the first is white and approaches the luster of silver; the second has by nature the yellow of gold itself; the third has an equal mixture of all.
5. Coronarium is drawn out from malleable bronze into sheets. Tinted by the bile of bulls, it looks like gold in the garlands (corona) of stage-actors, whence it is named. 6. Pyropus is named from its fiery color (cf. pup, "fire"). When six grams of gold are added to each ounce of bronze, the thin metal leaf becomes fiery and gives an imitation of flame; for this reason also it is called pyropus.
7. Bronze that is called regularis (lit. "in ingots") is called 'ductile' (ductilis) by other people- all Cyprian bronze is of this kind. 8. Bronze that is drawn out with a hammer is called 'ductile' (ductilis) just as, on the other hand, bronze that can only be poured out (fundere, ppl. fusus)
is called 'cast' (fusilis). That which can only be poured out is also called caldarius (lit. "suitable for heating"), for it would be broken by a hammer. All bronze that has its flaws diligently purged and heated out by fire is made into regularis. 9. Among the types of bronze, Campanian bronze is so named from Campania, that is, the province that is in Italian territory. It is best for all utensils and vessels.
10. Any bronze is cast better when great cold is applied. Bronze rapidlydevelops a patina unless it is smeared with oil. People say that it is best preserved in liquid pitch. 11. Of all the metals, bronze is the most resounding and has the greatest strength. For this reason, thresholds are bronze, whence in Vergil (Aen. 1.449):
The hinge on the bronze doors screeched.
Bronze comes from cadmia (i.e. zinc oxide) and chalcitis (i.e. copper pyrites). The drosses of bronze are cadmia and verdigris, and the 'bloom' of bronze (i.e. cuprous oxide). 12. Cadmia originates in furnaces from the metals of bronze and silver as a result of the fumes settling above them. Indeed, just as the ore from which bronze is made is called cadmia, so it reappears in furnaces and receives its original name. 13. Bronze 'bloom' is made or orig- inates in the casting process, when bronze is remelted and reliquefied, and cold water is poured on top, for the 'bloom' is produced from a sudden condensation, as from spittle. 14. Bronze also generates verdigris: when shreds of sheet bronze are placed over a vessel of very sharp vinegar so that they start dripping, what falls from this into the vinegar is pulverized and passed through a sieve.
xxi. Iron (De ferro) 1. Iron (ferrum) is so named because it buries the grain (far) of the earth, that is, the seeds of crops. It is also called chalybs ("sword," lit. "steel") from the river Chalybs where iron is tempered to have the best edge. Whence the material itself is also loosely called chalybs as in (Vergil, Aen. 8.446):
And the wound-inflicting steel (chalybs).
2. The use of iron was discovered after that of the other metals. Later this kind of metal was turned into a sym- bol of opprobrium, for long ago by iron the earth was plowed, but now by iron blood is shed. There is no mate- rial whose elements are so intertwined or adhere to each other so densely as iron, whence it has a hardness when it
is cold. Iron mines are found almost everywhere, but of all the kinds of iron, the prize is given to Seric (i.e. Chi- nese) iron. The Seres export this iron along with their cloth and animal skins. Second place goes to Parthian iron - none of the other kinds of iron are tempered to an edge from the pure metal, for a softer alloy is mixed in the others.
3. There are many differences in iron according to the type of its earthy element. The one type is soft, close to lead, and suitable for use in wheels and nails, while another type is breakable and bronze-like, well suited for tilling the earth. Another type is good in short lengths only and for the nails in soldiers' boots, and another is quickly vulnerable to rust. These are all called strictura (lit. "a mass of wrought iron," or "an iron bar"), a word not used for other metals, from 'compressing' (stringere, ppl. strictus), a term aptly applied. There is a great dif- ference in the types of water in which the glowing iron is plunged when it is tempered, such as the waters of Bilbilis and Tirassona in Spain, and Como in Italy. 4. In sharpening iron, the edge is made finer by using oil, whence it is also customary for the more delicate iron implements to be tempered in oil, lest they be hard- ened by water to the point of fragility. Human blood avenges itself on iron, for it very quickly forms rust on contact.
Magnetic stone has an affinity with iron, for iron alone takes on the power of that stone and retains it for a long time. A certain architect in Alexandria built a temple vault from magnets, so that in it a statue made of iron might seem to hang in the air. Iron that has been in the fire is ruined unless it is hardened by hammering. When it has become red it is not suitable for hammering - not until it begins to get white. Iron smeared with vinegar or alum becomes similar to bronze. 5. The drosses of iron are rust and slag. Rust (robigo) is a corroding (rodere) flaw of iron, or of crops, as if the word were rodigo, with one letter changed. Also the word verdigris (aerugo) is from 'eroding' (erodere) - for verdigris is a flaw in iron so called from eroding - not from aerumentum ("bronze object"). 6. But slag is the residue and impurity that is heated out in the fire, and it is called slag (scoria) because it is 'cast out' (excutere) of iron. 7. Iron will be free of rust if it is rubbed with white lead and gypsum and liquid pitch. Also, rust does not damage iron implements if they are smeared with deer marrow or white lead mixed with oil of roses.
xxii. Lead (De plumbo) 1. Lead (plumbum) is so called because the depth of the sea was first tested with a ball (pila) made of lead. There are two kinds of lead, black lead and white lead (i.e. tin), but white is the better one. It was first discovered in the islands of the Atlantic Ocean. Indeed, it also occurs in Lusitania and Gallicia, where the ground is very sandy and black in color, and heavy. Tiny pebbles (of lead) are mingled with the sand, especially in dried-out river beds: people wash these sands and whatever sinks down they heat in furnaces. Dark heavy pebbles are also found in goldmines when they have been sluiced, and while the gold is being collected these pebbles remain with it. Afterwards, when they have been separated, the pebbles are melted together and resolved into white lead. Hence the weight of lead is the same as that of gold.
2. Black lead is abundant around Cantabria. It orig- inates in two ways: either it comes forth alone from its own vein, or it is produced with silver and is smelted from these mixed veins of ore. The first one to liquefy in fur- naces is tin, the second, silver. Whatever remains, when ore is added and smelted again, becomes black lead. 3. India has neither bronze nor lead; it can only trade gem- stones and pearls for these metals. We use black lead for pipes and sheet metal. Lead is mined laboriously in Spain and Gaul, while in Britain it is found in the upper crust of the ground.
xxiii. Tin(Destagno) 1. The etymology of stagnum (i.e. either tin or a silver-lead alloy) is ?poyYp(c)S?tv ("to sep- arate"), that is, what separates and divides. It separates metals that have become mixed up and mutually adul- terated by fire, and distinguishes bronze and lead from gold and silver. Tin also protects other metals from fire, and even though the nature of bronze and of iron is very hard, if they were without tin they would be burned and consumed. 2. A coating of tin on bronze vessels makes the taste more pleasing and discourages the contami- nation of verdigris. Mirrors are also tempered with tin. White lead may be made from it as from lead.
xxiv. Electrum (De electro) 1. Electrum (electrum) is so named because it reflects in the sun's ray more clearly than silver or gold; for the sun is called Elector ("the Shining One") by poets. This metal is more refined than all the other metals. 2. There are three kinds. The first kind, which flows from pine branches (i.e. amber, the
primary meaning of electrum), is called 'liquid electrum.' The second, which is found naturally and held in esteem, is 'metallic electrum.' The third kind is made from three parts gold and one part silver. You will find these same proportions if you melt natural electrum, for there is no difference between natural electrum and manufactured; both have the same nature. 3. Electrum that is natural has a character such that at a banquet it gleams even more brightly by lamplight than all the other metals. It also reveals poison, for if you pour some poison into a vessel made from it, it makes a harsh noise and gives off a variety of colors like a rainbow.
xxv. Weights (De ponderibus) 1. It is helpful to know about weights and measures, for all bodies, as has been written, are disposed and formed from the highest to the lowest with measure and number and weight (see Wis- dom 11:21). Nature gives weight to all corporeal objects, and "each object is ruled by its own weight" (Poem about Weights and Measures [anon.], 3). 2. First Moses, [who preceded all of the pagan philosophers chronologically, recorded for us numbers and measures and weights in diverse places in his writing]. The Argive Phidon first establishedthesystemofweightsin Greece, andalthough there were others more ancient than he, he was more active in this art. 3.A weight (pondus) is so called because it hangs (pendere) balanced in the scales, hence also the term pensum ("something weighed"). The term pon- dus is loosely used for one pound (libra). Hence also the dipondius (i.e. dupondius) is named, as if it were duo pondera ("two pounds"); this term has been retained in usage up to today.
4. A trutina (i.e. a kind of scale) is an instrument that suspends two weighted plates from a balance-tongue. It is made for weighing talents and hundred-pound
weights, just as a momentana (i.e. a smaller scale) is made for small trifling coins. This is also called a moneta. It also has the name statera from its number, because it stands (stare+ter, "thrice") evenly balanced with two plates and a single pointer in the middle. 5. The balance- tongue (examen) is the cord in the middle by which the balance of the scales is regulated and the plates made even. From this (i.e. examen) the strap (amentum) on lances is named. 6. The steelyard (campana) takes its name from the region in Italy (i.e. Campania) where its use was first invented. This does not have two plates, but is a rod graduated with pounds and ounces, and it measures using a sliding weight.
7. For every weight a fixed measure has been desig- nated with specific terms. 8. A calcus (lit. "pebble"), the smallest unit of weight, is one fourth of an obol, and is equivalent to two lentils. It is called a calcus because it is so tiny, like the stone calculus, which is so small that it may be 'trodden upon' (calcare) without discomfort.
9. The siliqua (lit. "carob pod") is a twenty-fourth of a solidus, and takes its name from the tree whose seed it is. 10.A ceratin (i.e. ceratium) is half an obol, containing one and a half siliquae. In Latin usage this is a 'semi- obol.' Moreover, ceratin is a Greek word (cf. m?p?ttov, "small horn"). [A siliqua] is translated as "small horn" in Latin. 11. An obol (obolus) weighs three siliquae, or two ceratin, or four calci. At one time it was made of bronze in the shape of an arrow. From this the Greeks took its name, that is, 'arrow' (cf. ßs2oç, "arrow"). 12. A scripulus weighs six siliquae. This is called a gramma ("scruple") by the Greeks. The scripulus is so named by forming a diminutive from the small stone called a scrupus.
13. A drachma (dragma) is an eighth of an ounce and the weight of a silver denarius, equal to three scripuli, that is, eighteen siliquae. The denarius is so named because it is reckoned as ten coins (decem numma). 14. The solidus (solidus) is so named because nothing appears to be lacking in it, for the ancients called something whole and entire a 'solid' (solidus). It is also called a nomisma because it is marked with the names (nomen) and images of rulers. Originally one nomisma was one argenteus, and this coin originated with the Assyrians. The Jews say that
Abraham was first to bring this type of coin into the land of Canaan. Among Latin speakers, the solidus is called by another name, the sextula, because it consists of six (sex) ounces. Common people, as we have mentioned, call this a 'golden solidus,' and they have named a third part of it a tremis, because 'taken three times' (ter missus) they make up a solidus. 15. Two sextulae make a duella, and three of them make a stater.
16. A stater is half an ounce, weighing three aurei. It is called a stater because it may stand for three solidi (stare + ter, "stand three times"). This is also the semi- ounce, because it consists of half an ounce. It is also the semissis (i.e. semis) because it is halfa weight, as if it were 'semi assis' (i.e. half a unit). 17. The Hebrews name the quarterweight (quadrans) with the similar word codrans, and it is called quadrans because it weighs one fourth
(quartus) of an ounce. 18. 'Shekel' (sicel), which has been corrupted to siclus in Latin, is a Hebrew term, and among the Hebrews it has the weight of an ounce, but for Greek and Latin speakers it is one quarter of an ounce, and half a stater, weighing two drachmas. Hence, when the word 'shekel' is read in divine Scripture, it is an ounce, but in pagan writings it is a quarter of an ounce.
19. An ounce (uncia) is so called because with its unity (unitas) it encircles (vincire) the entirety (universitas) of lesser weights, that is, it embraces them. It consists of eight drachmas, that is, twenty-four scripuli. Accord- ingly, this is held to be the legally recognized weight, because the number of scripuli it contains equals the hours of the day and night, or because twelve ounces counted together make a pound. 20. A pound is made of twelve ounces, and thus it is considered as a type of perfect weight because it consists of as many ounces as there are months in the year. It is called a 'pound' (libra) because it is independent (liber) and contains all the aforementioned weights within it.
21. The mina weighs a hundred drachmas; it is a Greek term (i.e. µv?) [and it equals 1,800 siliquae, 225 tremisses, 75 solidi, and 25 stateres]. 22. Among the Greeks the tal- ent (talentum) is said to be the greatest weight, for there is nothing smaller then a calcus or greater than a tal- ent. Its weight varies among different peoples. Among the Romans, a talent is seventy[-two] pounds, as Plautus shows (The Haunted House 644), because he says two tal- ents are 140 pounds. But there are three kinds: the lesser, the medium, and the greater. The lesser is fifty pounds, the medium seventy-two pounds, and the greater 120
pounds. 23. The centenarium has the name of a number because it weighs one hundred (centum) pounds. The Romans established this weight because of the perfec- tion of the number one hundred.
xxvi. Measures (De mensuris) 1. A 'measure' is some object that is limited in its amount or in time; a measure is either of body or of time. A measure of body is, for instance, the length or shortness of humans or pieces of wood or columns. Geometers even dare to investigate the idea that the orb of the sun itself has its specific measurement. A measure of time is, for instance, the measure of hours and days and years; whence we speak of the 'feet' of the hours as 'pacing out' (metiri, lit. "measure out"), that is, they measure (mensurare). 2. But strictly speaking a measure (mensura) is so named because with it fruits and grains are measured (metiri) - that is, by wet measures and dry ones, such as the modius (i.e. a Roman measure of corn), [the artaba (i.e. an Egyptian measure)], the urn, and the amphora.
3. The smallest unit of measure is the spoonful (coclear), which is half a drachma and weighs nine sili- quae. Three of them make a concula. A concula consists of one and a half drachmas. 4. A cyathus weighs ten drachmas; by some people it is also called a cuatus. An oxifalus is made when five drachmas are added to ten. 5. An acitabulus is one quarter of an hemina, and weighs twelve drachmas. A cotyla (i.e. cotula) is an hemina pos- sessing six cyathi. It is calleda cotyla because in the Greek language a cutting is called cote, and a hemina is cut into the two equal halves of a sextarius [and makes a cotyla]. But an hemina weighs one pound, and when doubled makes a sextarius. 6. A sextarius is two pounds. Two of them together are a bilibris; four of them "make a cenix (i.e. yo±vt(, a dry measure), a Greek term" (Poem about Weights and Measures 69), five of them together make a quinar or a gomor. Add a sixth and it makes a congius, for a congius is six (sex) sextarii, and from this the sextarius takes its name. 7. It is called a congius from congire (per- haps cf. congerere, "accumulate"), that is, "grow by an addition." Whence afterwards money that began to be given as thanks for a favor was called a congiarium. Thus each emperor, during his reign, would give out congia- ria, thereby capturing the favor of the populace, so that he would seem rather generous in his gifts. 8. But the congiarium is particularly a measure of liquids, and we
find that the concept and its name were established by the Romans at the same time.
9.A metrum is a measure for liquids. It takes its name from 'measure,' for the Greeks call a measure a µstpov. Hence also the metreta (i.e. another liquid measure) is named. Although 'urn' and 'amphora' and others of this type are also terms of measures, still, the metreta took its name due to the perfection of the number ten that it contains. The word metrum applies to every measure, for what is called metrum from the Greek is a measure (mensura) in Latin. Thus the cyatum is also a measure, and the amphora is a measure, and whatever contains more or less than these is a measure. But it has assumed this particular name (i.e. metreta) for itself because it is the measure of a perfect number, that is, of ten.
10. The modius is so named because it is perfect in its own measure (modus). It is a measure of forty-four pounds, that is, twenty-two sextarii. The reason for its number is derived from the fact that in the beginning God created twenty-two works. Thus on the first day he created seven works, that is, the formless matter, angels, light, the upper heavens, earth, water, and air. On the second day, only the firmament. On the third day, four works: the seas, seeds, sowing, and gardens. On the fourth day, three works: the sun, the moon and the stars. On the fifth day, three works: fish, reptiles of the waters, and flying creatures. On the sixth day, four things: beasts, livestock, reptiles of the land, and the human being. And all twenty-two kinds of things were created in six days. And there are twenty-two gen- erations from Adam to Jacob, from whose seed all the people of Israel were begotten. And there are twenty-two books of the Old Testament up to Esther, and the alpha- bet in which the teachings of divine law are composed consists of twenty-two letters. From these examples, then, the modius was established by Moses as twenty- two sextarii, following the measuring system of sacred law. And although different peoples in their ignorance might add or subtract weight from this measure, among the Hebrews it has been preserved in its divine definition using this sort of reasoning. The modius is named from 'measure' (modus). Hence also the word 'modest' (mod- icus), that is, moderate (moderatus). The term 'proper measure' (modus) may be applied to modest things, for we incorrectly use modicus for small things, not speaking properly.
11. The satum is a kind of measure according to the custom of the province of Palestine, holding one and a half modii. Its name is taken from the Hebrew language, for they refer to a 'taking' or a 'lifting' as satum, because whoever makes a measurement takes and lifts this very measure. There is also another satum, a measure con- taining twenty-two sextarii, like the modius. 12. The batus is named in Hebrew from 'olive press,' which they call either beth or bata. It holds fifty sextarii. This mea- sure is crushed out in a single pressing. 13. An amphora (amphora) is so named because it is lifted on this side and that (cf. ?µ??(c), "on both sides"; ??sp?tv, "carry"; ??op?±v, "carry along"). It is said to have been named in Greek for its shape because its two handles look like ears (i.e. ?µ??(c)
+ auris, "ear"). It holds a cubic foot of wine or water, but three Italian modii of grain. A cadus is a Greek amphora
containing three urns.
14. The urn (urna) is a measure that some people call a quart (quartarium). Properly speaking, an urn is a vessel that is normally used for preserving the ashes of the dead. Concerning this the poet says (Lucan, Civil War 7.819):
He who has no urn is covered by the sky.
15. The medimna (i.e. medimnum) is a measure contain- ing five modii. The medimna is named from the Latin language, that is, half (dimidia), because it measures five modii, which is half the number of a perfect ten. 16. The artaba is a measure used by the Egyptians, consisting of seventy-two sextarii, composed of that number because of the seventy-two peoples and languages that have filled the globe (see IX.ii.2). 17. A gomor has the weight of fif- teen modii. The corus is filled by the measure of thirty modii. This derives from the Hebrew language and is called cor from its similarity to a mound, for Hebrew speakers call mounds corea - for thirty modii heaped up
together look like a mound, and equal the weight that a camel carries.
xxvii. Symbols(Designis) 1. Many symbols for weights are unknown and they cause errors for readers. For this reason we append their forms and characters, as they were used as symbols by the ancients.
2. The letter Z signifies half an obol. - A single straight horizontal line signifies an obol. = Two such lines are two obols. The Latin letter T means three obols. The Latin F means four obols. Latin E stands for five obols.
3. However, there is no symbol for six obols, because there are six of them in one drachma, which is the weight of a silver denarius. H, the letter eta, stands for eight siliquae, that is, a tremis. The Latin N signifies the Greek nomisma, that is, the solidus. IB, an iota next to a beta, means half a solidus.
4. < Two lines dividing themselves from left to right out of a single angle stand for a drachma, which people also call an olce. NG, a Latin N next to a Greek gamma,
means a semi-ounce. Go, a Greek gamma followed by
a Latin O superscript, stands for an ounce. , a Greek lambda with a Latin I placed through its center, means a pound.
5. Kv,a Greek kappa followed by a Latin V superscript, means a cyatum. But if it should have a Latin O next to it, i.e. KO, it means an (h)emina, which the Greeks call a cotyle. (e If a Greek xi receives an adjoining Latin E, it signifies a sextarium.
6. (o If the xi has a Latin O joining it, it indicates an acitabulus, which the Greeks call an oxifalus. A Greek mu witha Latin N directly above it stands for a mina. T2
A Latin T followed by a Greek lambda means a talent.
Xo,a Greek chi with the superscript letter O to its right, is a cenix.
