i. Ships (De navibus) 1. In turn, Ihave applied myself to the terms for specific skills by which something is made, terms for the tools of the artisans or whatever proves use- ful to them, and anything else of this sort worth pointing out. 2. The general term 'craftsman' (artifex) is so given because he practices (facere) an art (ars, gen. artis), just as a goldsmith (aurifex) is someone who works (facere) gold (aurum), for the ancients used to say faxere instead of facere.
3. A 'ship captain' (nauclerus) is the master of the ship, and is named thus because the ship is under his assignment, for 'assignment' is called m2?poç in Greek. But the others on the ship have their share as well. 4. The helmsman (gubernio), also known as the guberna- tor, as if the word were coibernator, because his prudence restrains (coibere, i.e. cohibere) the winters (ibernum, i.e. hibernum), that is, the storms of the sea. 5. The word 'sailor' (nauta) is derived from 'ship' (navis). Sometimes navita is used poetically for nauta, just as Mavors is used for Mars, but the correct term is nauta. 6. An oarsman (remex) is so named because he wields an oar (remus). The word is remex in the nominative case in the same way as tubex. 7. An epibata is named with a Greek term (i.e. sptß?t?ç, "one who embarks"); in Latin he is called a 'passenger' (superveniens). He has no duties on the ship, but, once his passage has been paid, arranges to cross over to foreign lands. 8. Some people maintain that a ship (navis) is so named because it needs a vigorous (navus) guide, that is, experienced, wise, and energetic - someone who knows how to control and take charge in the face of maritime dangers and accidents. Whence Solomon said (Proverbs 1:5): "He that understandeth, shall possess governments (gubernaculum)." The Lydi- ans were the first to construct ships, and in seeking out the uncertainties of the ocean, they made the sea into a thoroughfare for human use.
9. Rafts (ratis) were the first and most ancient type of watercraft; they are made from rough timber and beams fastened together. Ships built similarly to these are called rataria. Nowadays ships are metaphorically
called rafts, but properly speaking, rafts are beams joined to each other. 10. The trireme (trieris) is a large ship that the Greeks call a durco. Concerning it Isaiah says (cf. 33:21) "The great galley (trieris) shall not go across it." 11. The Carpasia is a ship named from the island of Carpathus, just as the Rhodia is named from Rhodes and the Alexandrina from Alexandria. 12. The Liburnae are named from Libya; these are merchant ships. Concern- ing them Horace (Epodes 1.1) says:
You will travel in Liburnian vessels amid the high (bulwarks of) warships.
13. Beaked (rostratus) ships are so named because they have a brass beak at the prow, on account of rocks, so that they won't be struck and crushed. 14. Long (longus) ships are the ones we call dromo, so named because they are longer than the others. Their opposite is the musculus,a short vessel. The dromo is so named from 'coursing,' for the Greeks call a course a 6póµoç.
15. The fleet (classis) is named from a Greek term, m?2ov, that is, "wood." Whence also a calo is a little boat that carries wood to the soldiers. 16. The ancyromachus is so named because with its speed it is suited for carrying the anchors (ancora) and other ship's instruments. 17. The phaselus (i.e. a light vessel shaped like a kidney bean) is a boat that we incorrectly call a baselus. Of it Vergil says (cf. Geo. 4.289):
In painted barges (phaselus).
18.A skiff (scapha), also called mat?omopoç (i.e. 'scout'), is a vessel known in Latin as a 'spyboat' (speculatorium), for omopóç (lit. "spy") is translated into Latin as "to observe." 19. A barge (barca) is the vessel that carries all the freight of a ship to shore. On the open seas the ship carries this boat in its hold because of the high waves, but whenever it is near to port, the barge repays to the ship the service it accepted at sea. 20. The paro (plural parones) is a vessel suited for pirates (pirata), and is so named from them. Cicero (Poems, fr. 8) says:
Then he gave himself to and trusted the wave-borne
paro.
And elsewhere (Roman comedy fr. 21 (Ribbeck)):
He frolicked near the shore in swift parunculi (i.e. little
parones).
21.A mioparo is named as if the term were minimus paro (i.e. 'smallest paro'), for it is a skiff built of wicker that provides a kind of vessel when it has been covered with a rough hide. German pirates use boats of this type on the shores of the Ocean and in marshes, because of their maneuverability. The History (i.e. Hegesippus's version of Josephus's History 5.15.1) speaks of these, saying: "The Saxon people, prepared for flight rather than for war, depend on their mioparones, not their strength." 22. The celox, which the Greeks call ms2?ç, that is, a fast bireme or trireme, is maneuverable and well suited for the service of a fleet. Ennius says (Annals 478):
The greased keel of a celox glides through the white waves.
23. Biremes (biremis) are ships having a double bank of oars (remus). Triremes (triremis) and quadriremes (quadriremis) have three and four banks. The penteris and hexeris have five and six banks respectively. 24. The actuaria is a ship that is driven (agere, ppl. actus) by both sail and oars at the same time. The hippagogus is a ship in which horses are usually transported (cf. ¯ppoç, "horse"; ?y?tv, "carry"). The pontonium is a slow, heavy river vessel, which can only move by being rowed. The term is also used for a trajectus (lit. "sent across"), that is, 'swung on a rope' (extentus), because it is carried along; whence transenna is a name for stretched-out rope.
25. The lembus is a short little boat that is otherwise known as the cumba or the caupulus, and also the lin- tris, that is, carabus, which is used on the Po River and in marshes. 26. The carabus is a small skiff made from wicker that provides a kind of boat when it has been covered with rough hide (cf. 21 above). The portemia is a broad little boat of the Syrian type, without a keel, named from 'carrying' (portare). People in Pannonia use them. 27. The trabaria (i.e. traberia) is a river-boat that is hollowed out from a single tree trunk (trabs). It is also known as the litoraria, and as the caudica, made from a single hollowed piece of wood (cf. caudex, gen. caudicis, "trunk"). It is called a caudica because it carries (capere) from four to ten (decem) people.
ii. 
Parts of the ship and its equipment (De partibus navium et armamentis) 1. The stern (puppis) is the rear part of a ship, as if the term were post (lit. "after"). The prow (prora) is the front, as if it were priora (lit. "ear- lier"). The hull (cumba; cf. máµß?, "the hollow of a ves- sel") is the lowest part of the ship, so named because it 'sinks down' (incumbere) in the water. The keel (carina) is named from 'coursing along' (currere), as if the word were currina. 2. The forus is the concave side (i.e. the hold) of the ship, named from carrying (ferre)a burden. Or it is the deck-planking of the ship that is spread out, so named because it supports (ferre) walking or because it sticks out on the outside (foris). Vergil says of it (Aen. 6.412):
[And he clears the gangways (forus).]
3. The oarlocks (columbaria) are the hollow places in the upper part of a ship's sides, through which the oars stick out. They are so named, I believe, because they are similar to the little holes in which doves (columba) make their nests.
4. Gangways (agea) are passageways, places in the ship through which the boatswain approaches the rowers. Concerning this Ennius says (Annals 492):
He places many things in the hold (forus), and the long gangway (agea) is filled.
5. The thwarts (transtrum) are planks where the row- ers sit; they are so named because they are 'athwart' (in transverso). Vergil calls them 'yokes' (iugum; Aen. 6.411).
6. Oars (remus) are named from 'moving back' (remo- vere) and tonsae (i.e. another word for 'oar') from clip- ping (tondere, ppl. tonsus) and shearing off the waves, just as barbers (tonsor) are named from clipping and shearing off hair. 7. The blade (palmula) is the wide end of the oar, named from the palm (palma). By the blade, the 'sea is pushed' (mare impellitur).
The yardarms (antemna) are so called because they are set 'before the current' (ante amnem), for the cur- rent flows past them. The cornua (lit. "horns") are the ends of the yardarm, so named using a trope. 8. The mast is the pole on a ship that holds up the sail. It is called a mast (malus) because it has the shape of an apple (malum) at the top, or because it is circled by
certain wooden handles (malleolus), as it were, by whose revolution the sail is raised more easily. 9. The mast- step (modius, also meaning "a measure of volume") is that in which the mast stands, named on account of its resemblance to a measuring vessel. Mast-heads (carch- esium) are pulleys at the tip of the mast, shaped like the letter F, through which ropes are pulled. Cinna says (fr. 2):
The shining mast-heads (carchesium) of the tall mast glitter.
10. Pulleys (trochlea) are so named because they have little wheels, for a wheel is called tpoyóç in Greek.
11. Parastatae (lit. "by-standers") are posts 'standing at equal height' (pares stantes) by which the mast is sup- ported. Cato says (fr. 18): "The mast bound fast, the parastatae fastened." 12. The tiller (clavus) is that by which the rudder is steered. Concerning it Ennius says (Annals 483):
That I may hold the tiller (clavus) straight and steer the ship.
13.A porticulus is a hammer carried (portare) in the hand, by means of which the timing-signals are given to the rowers. Concerning it Plautus says (The Ass-Dealer 518):
You yourself hold the porticulus (i.e. the control) for speaking and keeping silent.
14. The grapple (tonsilla) is an iron or wooden hook to which, when it is fixed on the shore, ropes from the ship are fastened. Concerning it Ennius says (Annals 499):
They fasten the hooked tonsillae, they grip the shore.
15. The anchor (anchora) is an iron spike taking its name viaa Greek etymology, because it grasps the rocks orsand like a person's hand, for the Greeks call the hand mUpa (i.e. y?(c)p, with an aspirated k sound), but 'anchor' has no aspiration among Greek speakers, for it is pronounced
?ymUpa. Whence also among the ancients it was ren- dered without aspiration (i.e. as ancora, not anchora). 16. Pulvini (in classical Latin, harbor platforms or breakwa- ters) are devices by means of which ships are launched or drawn up into a berth. The pons (i.e. gangway to shore) is the ladder of a ship.
iii. 
Sails (De velis) 1. The Greeks call sails ?pµ?va because they are moved by the air (aer); among Latin speakers a sail is called velum, from 'flight' (volatus). Whence also this passage (Vergil, Aen. 3.520):
We spread the wings of the sails (velum).
2. The kinds of sails are the acation, the epidromus, the dolo, the artemo, the siparum, and the mendicum. The acation is the largest sail of these, and is raised in the middle of the ship. 3. The epidromos is the next widest, and raised in the stern. The dolo is the smallest sail and is fixed to the prow. The artemo is considered to be more for directing the ship than for speed. 4. The siparum (i.e. a topsail) is a type of sail having a single 'foot' (pes, i.e. 'clew'). With this sail, craft are aided in sailing whenever the force of the wind weakens. Concerning it Lucan says (Civil War 5.428):
And spreading the highest sipara of the sails he collects the dying winds.
People assume that this sail is named from 'separation' (separatio). The 'foot' (pes) is the lowest corner of a sail, as sailors speak of it.
iv. Ropes (De funibus) 1. Ropes (funis) are so named because in earlier times they were covered with wax to be used as torches, whence also 'rope torches' (funale). Cords (restis), either because they hold rafts (ratis) together, or because with them nets (rete) are stretched out. The rudens is a ship's rope, so named from exces- sive creaking (cf. rudere, "creak loudly"). 2. Spirae (lit. "coils") are ropes that are used during storms; sailors are also in the habit of calling them cucurbae. Spirae are named from spartum (i.e. a plant used for making rope).
3. The propes is a rope with which the foot (pes, i.e. clew) of a sail is fastened, as if it were 'for the feet' (pro pedes). Concerning this Turpilius says (fr. 216):
As when the favorable wind bears the ship out to sea if someone has released the propes, the left side of the sail. 
4. The tormentum is a long rope used on ships, which stretches from the prow to the stern. With this rope the ship's timbers are joined more tightly. Tormenta, so called from 'twisting' (tortus), are cords and ropes. 5. The scaphon is a rope attached to the prow. Concerning it Caecilius says (fr. 243):
I have come on an amorous voyage, with the sail's foot reaching up to the scaphon.
6. The opisphora are ropes stretched back from the ends of the yardarm on the right and left. The prosnesium is the hawser with which a ship at the shore is fastened to a post. The mitra is a rope that binds the ship in the middle.
7. The anquina is the rope by which the yardarm is bound to the mast. Concerning it Cinna says (fr. 3):
And the mighty anquina regulates a stable course.
8. The tow-rope (remulcum) is the rope with which a ship is tied and towed instead of relying on oars. Concerning this Valgius says (fr. 4):
Here my boat, swinging from a long tow-rope (remulcum), sets me, rejoicing, in these delightful lodgings.
9. Straps (struppus) are bindings made of leather thongs or flax by which the oars are attached to the thole-pin (scalmus). Concerning these (Andronicus) Livius says (Odyssey 10):
And then he gave the order to fasten the oars with the straps (struppus).
10. The sounding-lead (catapirates) is a line with a lead weight, with which the depth of the sea is tested. Lucilius (Satires 1191) says:
The boy would swallow down this sounding-lead (catapirates) in the same way, this little oiled chunk of lead and flaxen string.
v. Nets (De retibus) 1. Nets (rete) are so named either from 'holding' (retinere) fish, or from the cords (restis) by which they are stretched. A smaller net is called a synplagium, from 'snare' (plagae), for strictly speaking plagae is the name for those ropes by which nets are stretched at the bottom and at the top. 2. The drag-net (funda) is a type of fishing net, so named because it is sent to the bottom (fundus). It is also called the casting-net (iaculum), from casting (iacere). Plautus says (fr. 175):
Before, you were an excellent caster (iaculator) indeed.
3. The tragum is a type of net so named because it is drawn (trahere). It is also called the 'seine' (verricu- lum) because verrere means "drag." 4. A basket net
(nassa) . . . The hunting-net (cassis, i.e. casses) is a type of net used by hunters, so named because it captures (capere). Hence we have the term 'in vain' (incassum), that is, without purpose, as if the term were sine cassibus ("without hunting-nets"), since without them hunting is pointless. 5. Mosquito-netting (conopium; cf. mYvY- p?(c)ov, from mÛvYy, "gnat") is a net like a tent, by which gnats are kept out. They are especially used in Alexan- dria, because gnats are copiously produced there by the Nile. Whence it is called conopeum, for Egypt is known as Canopea.
vi. The metalworkers' forge (De fabrorum fornace)
1. The metalworker (faber) has this name assigned to him from 'working iron' (facere ferrum). From this, the term was extended to the craftsmen of other industrial materials, and to their workshops (fabrica), but with a modifier, as in the 'wood craftsman' and the rest, because of the solidity (firmitas), as it were, of their products.
2. The pagans say that it is Vulcan who has author- ing over the metalworkers' forge, by Vulcan figuratively meaning "fire," as no kind of metal can be poured or stretched without fire. There is almost nothing that can- not be accomplished with fire, for here it prepares glass, there silver, here lead, there cinnabar, here pigment, there medicines. With fire stones are melted into bronze, with fire iron is produced and tamed, with fire gold is fash- ioned, and concrete and walls are bonded by stone that has been burned with fire. 3. Fire whitens black stones when it heats them, and darkens white woods by burn- ing them. It makes black charcoal from glowing coals, and fragile objects from hard pieces of wood. It creates incorruptible objects from those that are corruptible. It loosens what is bound, it binds back what has been loos- ened. It softens what is hard and renders hard what is soft. It has a medicinal use as well, for it is often beneficial to be burnt (i.e. cauterized). It is also a sure aid against the plague that is contracted when the sun is obscured. In any sort of work, one substance is produced with the first firing, another with the second, and another with the third. 4. Fire also has another variation, for there is one fire that is for human use and another which appears as a part of divine judgment, whether contracting as a lightning-bolt from the sky or bursting forth from the earth through the mountain peaks. 5. Fire (ignis) is so named because nothing can be born (gignere) from it,
for it is an inviolable element, consuming everything that it seizes.
A smithy (fabrica) contains two things: winds and flames. 6. Strictly speaking the flame (flamma) of a forge is so named because it is stirred up by the blasts (flatus) of the bellows. But the forge (fornax) is named from fire, for ???ç means "fire." Kaminus is the word for forge in Greek (i.e. m?µtvoç), derived from mauµa ("burning heat"). Ash (favilla) results when fire is gone from a spark. 7. Something is an ember as long as it is hot, but once it has gone out it is charcoal. An ember (pruna) is named from 'burning up' (perurere), but the char- coal (carbo) is so named because it lacks (carere) flames. Charcoal becomes even stronger when it is thought to have perished, for, when it has been relit, it burns with an even stronger light. Even without fire, it also pos- sesses such hardness that it is corrupted by no moisture, and not overcome by aging. Once extinguished it lasts so incorruptibly that the people who fix boundaries spread charcoals below the surface and place stones on top, so as to prove the boundary to a litigant however many generations later, and they recognize a stone fixed in this way to be a boundary.
vii. Metalworkers' tools (De instrumentis fabrorum)
1. The anvil (incus) is that tool on which iron is beaten out. It is named from striking, because we 'pound' (cud- ere, ppl. cusus) something there - that is, we stretch it by beating it - for to pound is to beat and to strike. But the ancients did not call it incus, but rather intus, because metal is beaten (tundere, ppl. tussus) on it, that is, stretched out. Whence also a mallet (tudis, i.e. tudes) is a hammer named from beating, that is, stretching.
2. The hammer (malleus) is so named because it strikes and stretches out anything when it is hot and soft (mol- lis). The marcus is a rather large hammer, called marcus because it is larger (maior) and stronger for striking. The martellus is medium-sized. The marculus is a very small hammer. Lucilius says (Satires 1165):
And just as when in the smithy the marculus beats the hot iron with the great blows of many workmen.
3. Tongs (forceps, plural forcipes), as if the word were
ferricipes, because they seize (capere) and hold the white-
hot iron (ferrum), or because we seize and hold some- thing forvus with them, as if the word were forvicapes, for forvus means "hot" - whence also the word 'fiery' (fervidus). Hence also we call those people 'beautiful' (formosus) whose blood produces an attractive blush with its heat. 4. The file (lima) is so named because it makes things smooth (lenis), for mud (limus) is smooth. The chisel (cilium, i.e. caelum or cilio; see XX.iv.7 below) is the tool with which silversmiths work, and from this engraved (caelare) vessels are named.
viii. The craft of building (De fabricis parietum)
1. The Greeks claim that Daedalus was the inventor of the craft of building, for he is said to have been the first to have learned this craft from Minerva. The Greeks call a craftsman or artisan tsmtYv, that is,a builder. But the master-builders (architectus) are the builders (caemen- tarius) who lay out the foundations. Whence the apostle Paul, speaking of himself, said (I Corinthians 3:10): "As a wise architect (architectus)I have laid the foundation."
2. Masons (macio, i.e. machio) are named from the scaf- folding (machina) on which they stand due to the height of the walls.
ix. Siting (De dispositione) There are three stages in building: siting, construction, and decoration. Siting (dispositio) is the marking out of the building site or seat and of the foundations. 
x. Construction (De constructione) 1. Construction is the building of the sides and the top. It is called construc- tion (constructio) or constructing (instructio) because it 'binds together' (instringere, ppl. instrictus) and makes something hold together, as stones held together with mud, and wood and stones held to each other. Dipping (intinctio) iron in water is also a way of binding; unless iron is dipped while it is white-hot, case-hardening and binding cannot take place. Construction is also named from the large amount of stones and wood, whence also 'heap' (strues). Building (aedificatio) is one kind of construction and renovation (instauratio) is another: building is new construction, but renovation is what restores something to its previous likeness (instar), for the ancients used to use the word instar for 'likeness'; hence they would say 'renovate' (instaurare). 2. Con- struction consists of the foundation, stones, lime, sand, and wood. The foundation (fundamentum) is so named
because it is the bottom (fundus) of the building. It is also called caementum from 'cutting' (caedere), because it rises from thick cut stone.
3. Stones that are suitable for building: white stone, Tiburtine, columbinus, river stone, porous, red, and the others. 4. As for white stone, some is hard and some is soft. Soft stone is cut by saw teeth and is so man- ageable to work with that letters may be carved in it as though in wood. 5. Tiburtine stone is named from the place in Italy (i.e. Tibur, present-day Tivoli). Although it is strong enough for building, nevertheless it is eas- ily split by heat. 6. Tufa (tophus) cannot be used for a building due to its perishability and softness, but it is appropriate for the foundation. It is crumbled by heat and sea air, and weathered by rain. 7. Arenacian stone is conglomerated from sea sand (arena). It is also called 'thirsty' because it stores the liquid it soaks up. This is also called Gaditanus (i.e. 'of Cadiz') in Baetica, from the island in the Ocean where a large quantity is hewn.
8. Piperinus (lit. "peppery") stone is whitish with black specks. It is hard and very strong. Cochleacius stone is conglomerated from shells (cochlea), pebbles, and sand. It is very rough and sometimes porous. 9. Columbinus stone is named from the color of the bird (cf. columba, "dove"). It is close in its character to gypsum and is very similar in its softness.
10. Molaris stone is useful for walls because it has a rather dense nature. It is hard and rough. Millstones (mola) are made from it, whence it has derived its name. There are four kinds; white, black, composite and porous. 11. Pumice (spongia) is a stone made from water, light and porous and suited for ceilings. 12. Silex (i.e. a flinty stone) is a hard stone. Of this kind of stone, black silex is the best, and also red silex in some places. White silex is undamaged by aging; when carved into mon- uments it remains undamaged and even fire does not harm it. Molds into which bronze is poured are made from this. Green silex is itself stubbornly resistant to fire, but there is nowhere where it is abundant, and it is found only as a stone and not as a rocky outcrop. Pale silex is rarely useful for foundations. 13. Round silex is strong against damage, but untrustworthy in a structure unless it is bound by a large amount of cement. 14. River silex always appears to be wet. It should be gathered in the summer and not set into the structure of a house for two years.
As far as building with clay is concerned, baked bricks are suited for walls and foundations, while curved and flat tiles are suitable for roofs. 15. 'Flat roof-tiles' (tegula) are so named because they cover (tegere) a building, and 'curved tiles' (imbrex) because they receive the rain (imber). Tegula is the primary term, and tigillum (lit. "small plank") is the diminutive. 16. Small bricks (lat- erculus) are so called because their stretched-out (latus) shape is formed by four boards placed allthe way around. Bricks (later) are unfired, and they also are so named because when 'stretched out' (latus) they are shaped with wooden forms. 17. Some of these forms are called cratis, the wicker forms in which people are accus- tomed to carry the clay for these unfired bricks. They are interwoven from reeds, and named after the term mpat?±v ("hold"), that is, because they hold on to each other.
18. Some people claim that mud (lutum) is named by antiphrasis, because it is not clean, for every thing that has been washed (lavare, ppl. lotus), is clean. 19. Quicklime (calcis viva; i.e. calx viva) is so called because although it may be cold to the touch, it contains fire hidden inside, and for this reason, when water is poured on it, the hidden fire immediately bursts forth. Its nature produces something amazing, for after it has caught fire it burns in water, which usually extinguishes fire, and it is extinguished by oil, which usually ignites fire. Its use is essential in constructing a building, for one stone cannot adhere strongly enough to another unless they are joined with lime. 20. Gypsum (gypsum) is a relative of lime, and it is a Greek term (i.e. yáyoç). There are many kinds. The best of all is good as 'translucent stone' (lapis specularis; see XVI.iv.37 above), and it is most pleasing in the images on buildings and in cornices. 21. Sand (arena, i.e. harena) is named from dryness (areditas, i.e. ariditas), not from clinging (adhaerere) in construction, as some people claim. It passes the test if it squeaks when pressed in the hand or if no stain remains when it is spread out on a white cloth.
22. Columns (columna) are named for their length and roundness (cf. colus, "distaff"; see xxix.2 below); the weight of the entire building rests on them. The ancient ratio was that a third of the height of the columns
should equal their width. There are four kinds of round columns: Doric, Ionic, Tuscan, and Corinthian. They differ among themselves as to breadth and height. There is also a fifth type which is called Attic; it has four angles or more, and sides of equal size. Bases (basis) are the props of columns. They rise up from the foun- dations and bear the weight of the construction above.
23. Basis is also the term for a very strong rock in the Syrian language. 24. Capitals (capitolium, i.e. capitulum or capitella) are named thus because they are the heads (caput, gen. capitis) of columns (columna), just like a head on a neck (collum). The architrave (epistolium, i.e. epistylium) is placed ontop of the capitals of the columns, and it is a Greek word (i.e. sptotá2tov, lit. "placed above").
25. The construction of pavement originated with the Greeks, anditiscalled'pavement'(pavimentum) because it is 'rammed down' (pavire), that is, it is struck. Whence also 'fear' (pavor) is named, because it strikes the heart.
26. An ostracus is a pavement made of tiles, so named because it is pounded from broken tiles mixed with lime, for the Greeks call pulverized tile ootpa. 27. Workmen call broken stones mixed with lime rudus; they set this underneath when they make pavements. From this also comes the word rudera (in fact the plural of rudus above).
28. A channel (canalis) is so named because it is hol- low like a reed (canna - a feminine noun). For good reason it is better for us to use the word canalis with feminine gender rather than masculine. 29. Water pipes (fistula) are so named because they pour out and supply water, for oto2a in Greek means "supply" (cf. ots22?tv, "send, bring"). They are shaped according to the amount of the water and their capacity; the water is divided through them in specific measures. Of these measures, there is the inch, the 'five quarter-digits' (quinaria), the square-digit, the round-digit, and whatever other mea- sures there may be. 
xi. 
Decoration (De venustate) Up to this point we have spoken of the elements of construction; what follows concerns the decoration of buildings. Decoration is any- thing added to buildings for the sake of ornament and embellishment, such as ceiling panels set off in gold and wall panels of rich marbles and colorful paintings.
xii. Paneled ceilings (De laqueariis) 'Paneled ceilings' (laquearium) are what cover the underside of a vault and adorn it. They are also called lacunaria (i.e. the plural of lacunar) because they have certain square or round panels (lacus) of wood or gesso, painted in colors with glittering figures. The primary term is lacus, as in Lucilius (Satires 1290):
The house and lacus resound.
Its diminutive is lacunar, as in Horace (Odes 2.18):
Nor does a gilded lacunar glitter in my house.
From this term, lacunarium, another diminutive is made, and by ?vt(c)ottyov (i.e. antistoechum, "substitu- tion of letters") one forms laquearium.
xiii. Wall panels (De crustis) Wall panels (crusta) are tablets of marble, whence also marble-paneled walls are called crustatus. It is not known who invented cutting marble into panels. They are made with sand and iron: by a saw pressing sand down along a very fine line, and by the cutting of the saw itself as it is dragged. But coarser sand erodes the marble more, so thin sand is suited for fine work and polishing.
xiv. Mosaics (De lithostrotis) Mosaics (lithostrotum) are crafted by the art of making pictures with small chips and cubes tinted in various colors. Cubes (tessella) are named from blocks (tessera), that is, from square stones, by forming a diminutive.
xv. Molding (De plastis) Molding for walls is repre- senting images and figures out of gesso and tinting them with colors. Molding (plastice) is the Greek name (cf. p2aottmóç, adj. from p2?oo?tv, "to mold") for what in Latin is 'forming likenesses from earth or gesso.' Thus, making some shape by pressing into clay is molding (plastis, i.e. plastes). Whence also protoplastus is the name
for the human being who was first made from mud (see Genesis 2:7).
xvi. Pictures (De picturis) 1.A picture is an image rep- resenting the appearance of some object, which, when viewed, leads the mind to remember. It is called 'picture' (pictura) as if the word were fictura, for it is a made-up (fictus) image, and not the truth. Hence also the term 'painted' (fucatus), that is, daubed with some artificial color and possessing no credibility or truth. Thus some pictures go beyond the substance of truth in their atten- tion to color, and in their efforts to increase credibil- ity move into falsehood, just as someone who paints a three-headed Chimera, or a Scylla as human in the upper half and girded with dogs' heads below. 2. The Egyptians first discovered the picture when they outlined a person's shadow with a line. It began like this, and was followed by the use of single colors, and afterwards by assortments of colors, so that gradually this art defined itself, and devised light and shadow and the differences in color. For this reason even now painters (pictor) first draw cer- tain shadows and the outlines of the images to come, and then fill in the colors, following the order in which the art was discovered.
xvii. Colorings (De coloribus) 1. Colorings (color) are so named because they are perfected by the heat (calor) of fire or of the sun, or because in the beginning they used to be filtered (colere) so that they would be as fine as possible. 2. Colorings either occur naturally or are manufactured. They occur naturally, as for example, red ochre, red earth, Paraetonium, Melinum, Eretria, and gold-coloring. The others are manufactured either by artifice or by mixture.
3. Red ochre (sinopis) was found first along the Black Sea, whence it takes its name from the city Sinope. There are three kinds: red, less-red, and something between these two. 4. Red earth (rubrica) is so named because it is red (ruber) and similar to blood in color. It occurs in many places, but the best is from the Black Sea (Pontus), whence it is also called 'Pontic.' 5. Syrian (Syricum) is a pigment with a red color, with which the chapter-heads in books are written. It is also known as Phoenician, so called because it is collected in Syria on the shores of the Red Sea, where the Phoenicians live. 6. Now, 'silk' (sericum) is one thing, and 'Syrian' (Syricum) is another, for silk is a fiber that the Chinese (Seres; East Asians
generally) export, while Syrian is a pigment that the Syr- ian Phoenicians gather at the shores of the Red Sea. It may also be counted among the manufactured pigments, for it is often made by being mixed either with red ocher or with vermilion (sandix).
7. The Greeks are reported to have been the first to dis- cover 'red lead' (minium), in the soil of Ephesus. Spain is more abundant in this pigment than other regions, and for this reason it has given its name to a particular river (i.e. the Minius, present-day Min˜o). When distilled, it produces liquid silver (i.e. quicksilver). Some people say that this red lead is cinnabar. 8. Cinnabar (cinnabaris) is named from draco (gen. draconis, "dragon") and bar- rus, that is, 'elephant,' for they say that it is the blood of dragons, shed when they entwine themselves around elephants. The elephants charge, and the dragons are overpowered, and the gore they shed dyes the earth, and a pigment is produced from what has stained the soil. It is a red-colored powder. 9. Although prasin, that is, green clay, is produced in mixed form in some lands, neverthe- less the best is the Cyrenian, in Libya. 10. Chrysocolla is grass-green in color, so named because its veins are said to contain gold (cf. ypUoóç, "gold"; mó22a, "glue"). This occurs in Armenia, but the preferred variety comes from Macedonia. It is mined along with the metal copper, and where it is discovered, silver and indigo are also found, for veins of chrysocolla have a natural association with these substances.
The pigment cypria is named from the island of Cyprus, where it is found in quantity. 11. Sandarach (sandaraca) occurs on the island Topazus in the Red Sea. It has the color of cinnabar and the odor of sul- fur. It is found in gold and silver mines, and the red- der it is and the worse it smells the better its quality. However, 'white lead' (cerussa), if it is baked in a fur- nace, produces sandarach, which as a result has a flame- like color. But if it is baked mixed with an equal part of red earth, it yields vermilion (sandix). 12. Arsenic (arsenicum), which Latin speakers call auripigmentum ("orpiment," lit. "gold-pigment") because of its color, is collected at the Black Sea from goldmine material, where sandarach is also found. The best arsenic takes on a golden color. It is pure and easily broken along the course of its veins. That which is paler or like sandarach
is rated to be a lesser quality. There is also a third, scaly kind that is mixed with a golden color. These arsenics have the same stench as sandarach, but sharper. 
13. Ochre (ochra) itself is produced on the island Topazus in the Red Sea, where sandarach is also pro- duced. Ochre is also made when red earth is heated in new pots that have been smeared around with clay. The longer it is heated in the furnace, the better it becomes. Venetum (i.e. 'sky-color'; see XVIII.xxxiii.2). . .
14. In Alexandria they first discovered how to prepare caeruleum (i.e. a blue pigment). In Italy people make it from a powder of sand and the powdery form of natron, but if you add Cyprium that has been heated in the fur- nace to this mixture, it will be similar to Vestorianum (i.e. a blue pigment).
15. The 'purple pigment' (purpurissum) is made from silversmiths' chalk; this chalk is dyed with murex and soaks up the color in the same way that wool does but more quickly. Nevertheless, the superior pigment is something else that has been soaked in a vat with raw dye-stuffs, and the next best is when silversmiths' chalk is added to the dye liquid once the first batch has been removed. The quality diminishes each time this is done. The origin of the most precious purple (pur- pura) is what is colored with hysginum (i.e. the dark red pigment from the plant called uoy? in Greek) and with rubea (i.e. rubia, the red dye from madder root).
16. Indigo (indicum) is found in India in the reeds, as a foam mixed with mud. It is dark blue in color, pro- ducing a wonderful mixture of purple and blue. There is another type of pigment in the purple-dye workshops, a foam, floating in bronze cauldrons, that the dye-makers skim off and dry.
17. Ink (atramentum) is so named because it is black (ater, feminine atra). Its color is necessary both for pic- tures and for everyday use. It is one of the manufactured pigments, for it is made from soot in various ways, when resin is added on top of heated pitch. The resin, which retains the smoke, is built up in a little vessel. Painters mix a glue into this, with water, so that it gleams more lustrously. 18. Fora speedier effect the charred remains of
old brushwood, crushed and mixed with glue, produce the appearance of atramentum for applying to walls. Some people also roast the dried dregs of wine and claim that, if the dregs are from a good wine, this atramen- tum has the appearance of indigo. But twigs of black grapevine, steeped in the best wine, produce the gleam of indigo after they dry out if you roast them dry and grind them up with added glue. 19. Usta (i.e. a red pig- ment), which is especially indispensable, is produced with no trouble, for if you heat a clump of good flinty stone in the fire, and quench it with very sour vinegar, a sponge drenched in it produces a purple color. When you grind this up it will be usta. 20. All atramentum is perfected in the sun, but all colors with a mixture of lime deteriorate.
21. Melinum is so named because one of the Cycladean islands, Melos by name, abounds in this mineral. It is white, and painters do not use it because it is very thick.
22. The white pigment anulare is so named because with it women's cosmetics are made bright. It is made from clay mixed with glass gems. 23. 'White lead' (cerussa, i.e. the cosmetic ceruse) is made in this way: fill a ves- sel with very sour vinegar; add vine twigs to this same vessel, and on top of the twigs place very thin sheets of lead, and then close the vessel carefully and seal it so that none of the fumes can escape. After thirty days the vessel can be opened, and you will find white lead, produced from the distillation of the lead sheets. This is removed, dried, and ground up and, with vinegar mixed in again, separated into lozenges that are dried in the sun. With this procedure, if you put copper sheets on top of the twigs they make verdigris (aerugo). Chalcanthus (i.e. copperas-water) . . .
xviii. Tools for building (De instrumentis aedificio- rum) 1. It is important for the construction of walls to be carried out according to the carpenter's square and in agreement with the plumb-line. The carpenter's square (norma) is named from a Greek term (i.e. yvÛµYv), and without it nothing can be made straight. It is made up of three rulers, such that there are two rulers of two feet while the third has two feet ten inches. When they have been smoothed to an equal thickness, the carpenter's square connects these rulers at the tips so that they make a triangular shape. This will be the carpenter's square.
2. The ruler (regula) is so named because it is straight
(rectus), as if the term were rectula, and smooth. The
plumb-line (perpendiculum) is so named because it is always set to hang down (adpendere). In short, unless everything in the construction is made according to the plumb-line and a sure ruler, it is inevitable that every- thing will be built awry, so that some things will be crooked, others sloping, some leaning forward and some leaning back - and so all building must be constructed with these tools.
3. A string (linea) is named from its material, for it is made from flax (linum). The name of the trowel (trulla) was given because it pushes (trudere) back and forth, that is, it covers stones with lime or clay. Hammer (martel- lus)... Scaffolding (machina).  4. Ladders (scalae) are
named from climbing (scandere), that is, ascending, for they cling to the walls. They are called scalae (i.e. a plural form) whether there is one or there are more, because the term exists only in the plural, just as the word litterae (lit. "letters") means "correspondence."
xix. Woodworkers (De lignariis) 1. Someone who works with wood (lignum) is called by the general term 'woodworker' (lignarius). 'Wagon-maker' (carpentar- ius) is a specialized term, for he only makes wagons (car- pentum), just as a shipbuilder (navicularius) is a builder and constructer of ships (navis) only. 2. A sarcitector is so called because out of many planks joined together on this side and that he repairs (sarcire) one structure of a building. The same person is called a tignarius because he applies plaster to the wood (cf. tignum, "piece of tim- ber, beam").
3. Wood (lignum) is named using a Greek etymology (cf. 2áyvoç, "lamp") because when ignited it is turned to light (lumen) and flame. Whence [also] the lamp (lych- nium) is so called, because it gives light. 4. All wood, moreover, is called 'material' (materia, also meaning "timber") because something can be made from it; the term will be materia whether you apply it to a door or to a statue. For material is always necessary for the pro- duction of an object, just as we say that the elements are the materia of things, because we see that it is from them that actual things are made. It is called material (materia) as if the word were 'mother' (mater).
5. Beams (trabs) are so named because they are set crossways (in transverso) to keep two walls together. Tim- ber (tignum) is one thing and beams are another, for tim- bers joined together make a beam. They are beams when they have been hewn into shape. 6. A boss (tholus, cf. Greek 9o2óç, "dome"), strictly speaking, is like a small
shield. It is in the center of the roof, and the beams come together in it. The tie-beams (coplae, i.e. copulae, lit. "joinings") are so named because they join (copulare) the cross-beams to each other. Cross-beams (luctans) are so called because when set up they hold themselves against each other in the manner of wrestlers (luctans). Agrantes   7. Posts (asser) are named from 'single-
ness' (as) because they are set up by themselves and not joined.
Shingles (scindula), because they are split (scindere), that is, divided. Pegs (epigrus) and nails are items with which wood is joined to wood. Nails (clavus) are so named as if the word were calibus, because they are made from calibs (i.e. chalybs), that is, iron, for chalyps is iron.
8. Boards (tabula) were called tagulae by the ancients, as if from 'covering' (tegere), whence also 'roof-tiles' (tegu- lae). A joining of boards is called a joint (commissura). The 'action of cutting' (sectio) is named from 'follow- ing' (sequi, ppl. secutus) those things it has begun, for 'to cut' (secare) is to 'pursue' (sectare) and 'follow' (sequi).
9. The name for saw (serra) was formed from a sound, that is, from its 'scraping noise' (stridor). The use of saws and compasses was invented by Perdix, a certain youth whom Daedalus, his mother's brother, had taken in as a boy to instruct in his studies. It is reported that this boy had such genius that, when he sought a quick way to divide wood, he copied the spine of a fish, sharpening a strip of iron and arming it with the biting power of teeth. Workmen name this the saw. The invention of this art drove his teacher Daedalus green with envy, and he threw the boy headlong from the citadel. Thereupon Daedalus went to Crete as an exile and was there for some time, as stories relate. From Crete he flew, using wings, and came to Cilicia. 10. The compass (circinus) is named because it makes a circle (circulus) when it is turned. This technique is carried out with a doubled string, which when single (i.e. undoubled) had been stretched across the width (i.e. the diameter desired). The point in the middle of the compass (i.e. of the circle) is called the center (cen- trum, i.e. msvtpov) by the Greeks- everything converges on this middle point.
11. The ax (securis) is so named because trees are cut down (succidere) with it, as if the word were succuris. Again, it is called securis as if it were semicuris, for it is sharp on one side and suited for digging on the other. 
This was called a penna (lit. 'wing') by the ancients; if both sides were sharp they called it bipennis. It was called bipennis because it had a sharp edge on either side, like two wings (pinna), for the ancients would call something sharp pennus, whence the wings (pinna) of birds, because they are sharp. See how this term penna has preserved its antiquity, because the ancients used to say penna, not pinna. This also pertains to the pick-ax (dolabra), because it has two prongs (duo labra, lit. "two lips"), for the ax has one. The hatchet (dextralis) is suited for the right hand (dextera). 12. The adze (ascia) is named from the shavings (astula, i.e. assula) that it removes from wood. Its diminutive is asciola. There is also an adze with a short handle and on the opposite side either a plain hammer or a hollowed one or a two-horned drag-hoe.
13. The chisel (scalprus, i.e. scalprum) is so named because it is suited for carvings (scalptura) and making holes (foramen), as if the word were scalforus. Its diminu- tive is scalpellus. 14. The gimlet (terebra) is named from the wood-worm called terebra, which the Greeks call t?p?6Ûv. Hence it is called terebra because, like the worm, it 'bores a hole by abrasion' (terendo forare), as if the word were terefora, or as if it were transforans (i.e. "boring through"). 15. The auger (taratrum), as if the word were teratrum (i.e. from terere, "abrade"). The rasp (scobina) is so named because it produces filings (sco- bis) by abrasion. The rafter (cantherium) . . . The gouge (guvia) . . . 
xx. The invention of clothmaking (De inventione lanificii) 1. The pagans praise a certain Minerva for many clever inventions, for they claim that she was the first to have demonstrated the practice of clothmaking - to have set up the loom and dyed wool. 2. They also say that she was the discoverer of the olive and of crafts- manship, the inventor of many arts, and for this reason craftsmen commonly pray to her. But this is merely a poetic fiction, for Minerva is not the originator of these arts, but, because intelligence is said to be in a person's head - and Minerva was imagined to have been born from Jupiter's head - this is native ingenuity. And thus an intelligent person's sense, which discovers everything,
is in the head. Hence Minerva is said to be the goddess of the arts because nothing is more excellent than the native ingenuity by which all things are regulated.
xxi. Priestly vestments according to the Law (De veste sacerdotali in lege) 1. There are eight kinds of priestly vestments according to the Law (i.e. the Hebrew Scriptures; see Exodus 28 and 39). The poderis is a priestly garment of linen, close-fitting and reaching to the feet (pes, gen. pedis), whence it is named. Common people call ita camisia. 2. The abanet is a rounded priestly belt, woven like damask out of scarlet, purple, and hyacinth, such that flowers and gems seem to be set out on it.
3. The pilleum is made from linen (byssus), rounded like a hemisphere, covering the priestly head and held tightly around the skull with a headband. The Greeks call this a tiara (i.e. tt?pa) or galerum, and so do we.
4. The mahil, which is an ankle-length tunic entirely of hyacinth color, has seventy-two bells at the feet, and the same number of pomegranate-figures hanging between them (see Exodus 28:33).
5. The ephod, which can be translated into Latin as superindumentum (lit. "overclothing"), was a cloak over the shoulder, woven from four colors and gold. Over each shoulder an emerald was set in gold and the names of the patriarchs were carved on them. 6. The logium (cf. 2óytov, "high priest's breastplate"), which is called the rationale (i.e. "breastplate") in Latin, was a dou- bled cloth, woven with gold and four colors, the size of a square as wide as a palm; there were twelve very precious stones woven into it. This garment was tied over the shoulder across the chest of the high priest.
7. The petalum is a golden plate worn against the high priest's forehead; it would have the Tetragrammaton, the name of God, written on it in Hebrew characters. 8. The batin, or feminalia, were knee-length linen breeches with which the private parts of the priest would be hidden.
xxii. The different kinds of clothing and their names (De diversitate et nominibus vestimentorum) 1. The different kinds of clothing are coverings, garments, clothes and so on. 2. A covering (tegmen) is so named because it covers (tegere) the limbs, just as a tegumen (i.e. a variant of the same word) is a shelter (tectum) that covers the body. More precisely, clothing (vestimentum) is that which extends to the footprints (vestigium), as if the word were vestigimentum, such as an ankle-length
tunic. But the usage of authors has confused this term. A garment (indumentum) is so called because on the inside (intus) it is put onto (induere) the body, as if the word were intumentum. Amictus (i.e. a wrapping) . . .
3. 'Clothed' (vestitus) can be distinguished from 'adorned' (cultus), because 'adorned' is understood in a broader sense. Cultus ("adornment, cultivation") may alsobedistinguishedfrom habitus ("habit, disposition"), because habitus has to do with what is inborn, and cultus with what is cultivated by humans.
4. Most articles of clothing are named from the time when they are most often worn, or from the place where they were first made or are most often sold, or from their type of color, or from the name of their inven- tor. 5. Humankind's most ancient article of clothing was the loincloth (perizoma), that is, the subcinctorium, with which only the genitals are hidden. The first mor- tals made these for themselves, at first from tree leaves, because they were blushing after their disobedience and hid their private parts. Some barbarian peoples still wear them up to the present day, since they are unclothed. These are also called campestria, because young men, exercising unclothed on a field (campus), cover their pri- vate parts with these same loincloths.
6. The tunic (tonica, i.e. tunica), that very ancient arti- cle of clothing, is so called because it makes a sound when the person wearing it walks, for a sound is a 'tone' (tonus). Tunics of hide were made first; Adam and Eve were clothed with these after they sinned and were expelled from Paradise. 7. The ankle-length (talaris) tunic is so named because it reaches to the ankles (talus) and falls to the feet. Likewise the pectoralis tunic because the ancients wore it short so that it only covered the chest (pectus, gen. pectoris), although nowadays it extends fur- ther. 8. The sleeved (manicleatus) tunic, that is, the man- icata, because it has sleeves (manica). The Greeks call it y?tpo6át? (lit. "hand-covering").
9. The dalmatic (dalmatica) garment was first woven in Dalmatia, a province of Greece. It is a white priestly tunic with purple stripes. 10. The reddened (russata) garment, which the Greeks call Phoenician and we call scarlet, was invented by the Lacedaemonians so as to conceal the blood with a similar color whenever some- one was wounded in battle, lest their opponents' spir- its rise at the sight. Roman soldiers under the consuls wore this, whence they used to be called russati. On the day before a battle it would be displayed in front of the
general's quarters as a warning and indication of the fight to come.
11. Laculatus cloth is cloth that has square pan- els (lacus) with pictures woven in or embroidered. Iacinthina (i.e. jacinth or hyacinth) cloth is resplendent with the color of the sky. 12. Molochinius (cf. µo2óytvoç, "of mallow-fiber") cloth is made using fibers of mal- low (malva); some people call this molocina and oth- ers malvella. 13. Silk (bombycinus) cloth is named from the silkworm (bombyx), which produces extremely long threads from itself; something woven of these threads is called 'silken' (bombycinus). It is manufactured on the island of Cos. Apocalamus  14. Serica (i.e. another word
for silk) cloth is named from 'silken' (sericus), or because the Seres (i.e. the Chinese, or East Asians generally; see XIV.iii.29) first made it available. Holosericus cloth is entirely of silk, for o2oç means 'entire.' Tramosericus has a linen warp anda weft of silk. Holoporphyrus is entirely of purple, for o2oç means 'entire.' 15. Byssinus is white and made ofa type of thicker linen. There are some peo- ple who consider byssum to be a certain type of linen (see xxi.3 above).
16. Fibrinus [has a weft made of beaver (fiber) hair]. Goathair (caprinus) . . . Masticinus . . . and menus . . . Linen (lineus) cloth, because it is made only of flax (linum). 17. Linostemus is woven of wool and linen and is called linostemus because it has linen (linum) in the warp (stamen) and wool in the weft. 18. Upright (rectus) cloth is woven upwards by someone standing. Segmentatus cloth is decorated with certain bands and separately cut pieces, so to speak (cf. xxxi.12 below). People also refer to the separately cut pieces of any material as praesegminae.
19. Lightweight (levidensis) cloth is so named because it is open-textured and loosely woven (leviter densatus). Heavyweight (pavitensis) is named as the opposite to lightweight, because it is closely woven and felted (cf. pavire, "ram down").
20. Citrosus, so called as if it were crimped like a citron- tree (citrus). Naevius writes (Punic War 22):
Beautiful in her gold and her citrosus garment. 
21. A velenensis tunic is one that was brought from the islands. An imported (exoticus) garment is a foreign
one coming from the outside, such as a garment from Greece in Spain. A polymitus garment is multicolored, for polymitus is woven of many colors (cf. po2áµttoç, "damask"). 22. An embroidered (acupictus) garment is woven or decorated with a needle (acus; cf. pictus, "deco- rated"). This is also called 'Phrygian' (Phrygius) because all the Phrygians are said to be skilled in this art, or because it was invented in Phrygia. Whence also the arti- sans who practice this are called 'embroiderers' (Phry- gio). Vergil writes (cf. Aen. 3.484):
A Phrygian (Phrygius) cloak.
23. Trilix cloth is named from three threads (licium), because there are also simplex and bilex cloths. Rallus, which is commonly called 'polished' (rasilis). Cloth that has been restored to look like new, although it is old, is called 'refurbished' (interpolus).
24. 'Patchwork' (pannucius) is so named because it is covered with various patches (pannus). A colobium is so named because it is long and sleeveless (cf. mo2oßóç, "cut off"); the ancients wore this often. A levitonarium is a linen colobium without sleeves, of the sort worn by Egyptian monks. 25. A loincloth (lumbare) is so named because it is fastened over the loins (lumbus) or because it clings to them. In Egypt and Syria they are worn not only by women but also by men. Whence Jeremiah took his lumbare across the Euphrates, and hid it there in an opening in the rocks, and afterwards discovered that it had been torn (Jeremiah 13.1-7). This is also called a renale by some people, because it is tied over the loins (renes). 26. A limus is a garment that reaches from the navel to the feet. This garment has a purple band at its lower edge that is 'aslant,' that is, 'undulating,' whence it takes its name, for we call something that is aslant limus.
27. Lint (licinum, i.e. licinium) is so named because its texture is completely bound together (ligare), as if the term were liginum, but with the g changed to a c. 28. An armilausa is popularly so named because it is divided and open in the front and the back, and is closed (clausus, ppl. of claudere) only at the shoulders (armus), as if the term
were armiclausa, but with the c removed. 29. A night- shirt (camisia) is so named because we sleep in these in our cots (cama), that is, in our beds. Undergarments (femoralia) are so called because they clothe the thighs (femur). These are also known as 'breeches' (bracae), because they are short (cf. ßpayáç, "short"), and the 'shameful parts' (verecunda) of the body are concealed with these. 30. The tubrucus is so named because it cov- ers the shins (tibia) and breeches (bracae). The tibracus, because it reaches from the arms (bracium, i.e. brachium) to the shins (tibia).
xxiii. The typical costumes of certain peoples (De pro- prio quarundam gentium habitu) 1. Each nationality has its own costume belonging just to it, such as the Parthians and their sarabara (i.e. wide trousers), the Gauls and their linna, the Germans and their reno, the Spaniards and their stringes, the Sardinians and their mastruca. 2. Sarabarae are flowing, sinuous garments, concerning which one may read in Daniel (cf. 3:94): "And their sarabarae were not altered." And in Publilius (Maxims, fr. 19):
As, why therefore have the Parthians draped sarabarae
over your stomach?
But some people call certain head-coverings sarabarae, the sort that we see pictured on the heads of the Magi. 3. Linnae are soft square mantles. Concerning them Plautus says (fr. 176):
He was covered by a linna of Gaulish weave.
4. The reno is a covering from the shoulders and chest to the navel, made so shaggy with twisted nap that it repels rain. Common people call it a reptus because it is as if its long fibers are 'creeping like a snake' (reptare). Concern- ing them Sallust says (Histories 3.104): "The Germans clothe their naked bodies with renones." They are called renones from the Rhine (Renus) river of Germania, where they are often worn. 5. The mastruca is a Germanic garment made from the hides of wild animals, about which Cicero speaks in On Behalf of Scaurus (45): "He whom the royal purple did not disturb, was he moved by the mastruca of the Sardinians?" Mastruca is as if the word were monstruosus ("monstrous"), because those who wear them are transformed as if in the garb of wild animals.
6. Nationalities are distinguished by their costume just as they differ in their languages. The Persians cover their arms and legs with drawings and their heads with a turban. The Alani are distinguished by their pointed hats. The Scotti raise the hackles with their ugly dress, as well as with their barking tongues. The Alemanni are clothed in their woolen cloaks (sagum), the Indians in linen. The Persians wear jewels, the Chinese wear silk, and the Armenians wear quivers.
7. It is not simply in clothing but in physical appear- ance also that some groups of people lay claim to features peculiar to themselves as marks to distinguish them, so that we see the curls (cirrus, perhaps "topknot") of the Germans, the mustaches and goatees of the Goths, the tattoos of the Britons. The Jews circumcise the foreskin, the Arabs pierce their ears, the Getae with their uncov- ered heads are blond, the Albanians shine with their white hair. The Moors have bodies black as night, while the skin of the Gauls is white. Without their horses, the Alani are idle. Nor should we omit the Picts (Pictus), whose name is taken from their bodies, because an arti- san, with the tiny point of a pin and the juice squeezed from a native plant, tricks them out with scars to serve as identifying marks, and their nobility are distinguished by their tattooed (pictus) limbs.
8. The sexes also have accepted customs of appearance, such as short hair for men and flowing locks for women, long hair being the mark of virgins in particular. For women the hair is properly arranged when it is gathered up on the top of the head and protects the citadel of their head with a circle of hair.
xxiv. Men's outer garments (De palliis virorum) 1. A cloak (pallium) is that with which the shoulders of atten- dants are covered so that, while they are providing ser- vice, they may hurry about unencumbered. Plautus says (fr. 177):
If you are to amount to anything, hang a pallium on your shoulders and let your feet go as fast as they can.
It is called pallium from skins (pellis), because in earlier times the ancients used to wear skins over their clothing, as if the word were pelleum. Or it is named from palla (i.e. another type of robe, related etymologically to pallium) by derivation. 2. The mantle (chlamys) is a garment that is put on from one side, and not sewn together, but
fastened with a brooch. Hence it also takes its name in Greek (i.e. y2aµáç).
3. The toga (toga) is so named because with its wrap- ping it covers (tegere) and conceals the body. It is a plain cloak with a round, rather flowing shape, and with rip- pling folds, as it were: it is drawn under the right arm and arranged over the left shoulder. We see its likeness in the clothing used for statues and pictures, and we call these statues togatus (lit. "wearing a toga"). 4. Romans wore togas during peacetime, but in time of war they wore military cloaks (paludamentum). The proper mea- surement for a toga is six ells. 5. A toga earned by those who brought back the palm (palma) of victory from an enemy was called palmatus. These were also called dec- orated togas because they had the victories woven into them with a display of palm leaves. 6. The white (can- didus) toga, also the 'chalked' toga, is one that candidates (candidatus) seeking public office wore when they went round canvassing; chalk was added so that it would be whiter and more noticeable. Cicero, in an oration that he delivered against his rivals for office, wrote On the White Toga.
7. AGabine girding arrangement occurs when the toga is put on so that the edge which is flung back over the shoulder is drawn up to the chest in such a way that the decorations hang on either side from the shoulder, as the pagan priests used to wear them, or as the praetors used to be girded. 8. The trabea (i.e. a robe of state) was a type of toga out of purple and scarlet cloth. In the beginning, the kings of the Romans used to make procession dressed in these. People claim that Romulus was the first to devise this garment to distinguish the king. The trabea is so named because it may elevate (transbeare)a person into greater glory, that is, it may make a person further blessed for the future with a greater rank of honor.
9. The paludamentum was a special cloak of emperors, distinguished by its scarlet and purple, and its gold. Sal- lust speaks of it (Histories 1.87) saying: "He has changed his toga for a paludamentum." This was also the 'war cloak' (bellicum pallium), so named, it seems to some people, because by wearing it the emperor made it
public (palam) that war (bellum) was approaching. 10. A bordered-around (circumtextus) garment is what is called mUm2?ç ("encircled by a border all around") in Greek. Concerning it Vergil says (Aen. 1.649):
And a mantle bordered around (circumtextus) with saffron acanthus.
It is called 'bordered-around' because it is a round cloak.
11. Diplois is a Greek term (cf. 6tp2o(c)ç, "double cloak"), used because it is a double-folded (duplex) garment. Horace says (Epistles 1.17.25):
On the other hand, he whom Patience covers with a doubled (duplex) cloak.
12. There is also military clothing, which first began to be used from enemy booty in the campaigns in Gaul. Concerning which this was said in the Senate: "With their togas put aside the Quirites took up the sagum (i.e. the military cloak)." 13. Sagum (i.e. a coarse woolen mantle) is a Gallic term. It is called the sagum quadrum because at first among the Gauls it used to be 'square or fourfold' (quadratus vel quadruplex). 14. The paenula is a cloak with long fringes. The lacerna is a fringed cloak that at one time was worn only by soldiers. For this reason people used to distinguish the city crowd from those belonging to military camps by calling the former 'toga-wearing' and the latter 'lacerna-wearing.' Whence also the word is lacerna, as if with the ends of the fringes trimmed (cf. lacer, "mutilated, torn"), so that their fringes are not as long as those in a paenula. 15. The Spaniards called the mantum thus because it cov- ers the 'hands only' (manus tantum), for it is a short cloak. 16. The praetexta is a child's cloak, which noble boys used to wear while they were being educated until they were sixteen, whence they were called 'praetexta- wearing' boys. It is called a praetexta because it would be bordered (praetexere) with a wide purple band.
17. The casula is a hooded garment, named as a diminutive of 'hut' (casa), because it covers the whole person, like a small hut. Whence also the 'hood' (cuculla), as if it were a smaller chamber (cella). Thus it is also called a planetas in Greek, because they sway with 'wandering' (cf. p2av?t?ç, "wanderer") borders. Whence also the astral 'planets,' that is, the roving ones,
because they course about in their own erratic straying and motion. 18. Birrus (i.e. a rain cloak) is taken from a Greek word, for they say a birrus as bibrus (cf. ß(c)p- poç, "cloak"). 19. The melotes, which is also called a pera (lit. "bag"), is the skin of a goat which hangs from the neck and covers as far as the loins. Strictly speaking, this is the outfit needed for laboring. It was first made, as some people think, from the skins of martens (melo, i.e. meles), whence they are called melotes. 20. The fringes of garments, that is, the edges, are called the border (ora), derived from a Greek word, for the Greeks call a border opoç.
xxv. Women's outer garments (De palliis feminarum)
1. The regillum is the mantle of state for queens (regina), whence it is named. The peplum is a matron's garment marked with purple, whose hem glitters at the edge with gold threads. 2. The palla is a woman's garment that is a square cloak (pallium). It hangs down to the feet and has gemstones fixed in a row. And it is called palla from the word p?22?tv ("sway"), that is, from the movement that occurs around the edge of such clothing, or because as it sways it ripples in fluttering folds. 3. The stola is a matron's garment that, covering the head and shoulders, is 'sent' from the right side over the left shoulder. Fur- thermore, it is called stola, with a Greek word (i.e. oto2?, "robe"; cf. ots22?tv, "send"), because it is 'sent out on top.' 4. This is also called by the Latin term ricinium (i.e. 'veil') because half of it is flung back (reicere). Peo- ple commonly call it a mavors (lit. the archaic name for Mars; cf. µa??ópt?ç, "veil, headdress"). It is called mavors as if the term were Mars, for it possesses the mark of mar- ital (maritalis) dignity and authority, for man is the head of woman, whence this garment is worn over a woman's head. 
5. The amiculum is the linen cloak of prostitutes. In ancient times, married women caught in adultery were clothed in these so they might sully their virtue in this amiculum rather than in a stola. Thus among the ancients this garment was a mark of prostitution, but nowadays in Spain it is a mark of respectability. 6. The theristrum is a veil with which the women of Arabia and Mesopotamia are covered even today; in the heat they are very well protected by its shade. Isaiah (3:23) speaks concerning it. 7. The anaboladium is a linen cloak for women that covers their shoulders. Greek (cf. otv6Ûv, "linen veil") and Latin speakers call it a sindon.
xxvi. Bedspreads and other cloths that we use (De stratu et reliquis vestibus quae in usu habentur) 1. The stragulum is a multicolored cloth that the craftsman's hand adorns witha rich variety of colors. It is so named because it can be used as a spread (stratus) and as a cloak (amictus). Solomon said of it (cf. Prov. 31:22): "She hath made for herself clothing of tapestry (stragulum)."
2. Some people think the ludix (i.e. lodix, "coverlet") is named from public games (ludus), that is, the theater, for when young men used to leave the brothel at the public games, they would conceal their heads and faces with these coverings, because someone who has entered a whorehouse is usually ashamed. Galnapes  3. Couch-
backs (fulcrum) are couch ornaments, so called because we are propped up (fulcire) by them, that is, we are sup- ported, or because they prop up the torso and head. Common people call them backrests (reclinatorium).
4. Bolsters (cervicalium) are so named because they are placed under the neck (cervix) or elbow. The pillow (pul- villus) is named from the pulvinar, which is a rich per- son's couch. Mattresses (culcita) are so named because they are packed (calcare), that is, filled with feathers or stuffing, so that they may be softer and warmer. 5. Rugs (tapete) are so named because they were first spread out for the feet (pes, gen. pedis), as if the word were tapedia. Sipla (i.e. psila) rugs have their pile on one side, as if the word were simpla (cf. simplus, 'single'). The amphi- tapa is a rug with pile on both sides. Lucilius says (cf. Satires 13):
Siplae and amphitapae soft with thick pile.
6. Tablecloths (mantelium) are used today for covering tables. However, as their name indicates, they were once offered for wiping one's hands (manus; cf. tela, "cloth"). Napkins (mappa) belong to the banquet and the 'serv- ing' (apponere) of feasts, as if the word were manupa, and they are named on this account. The diminutive is mapella. Toral ("couch coverlet") is a long, continu- ous cloth, named from 'couch' (torus). 7. Sabanum is a Greek word (cf. o?ßavov and oaß?vtov, "linen cloth or towel"). The face towel (facietergium) and hand towel (manitergium) are named from wiping (tergere) the face (facies) or hands (manus).
Curtains (velum) are so named because they conceal (velare) the interior of a home when they are drawn shut.
8. Tapestries (aulaeum) are large decorated curtains; they are called aulaea because they were first invented
in the palace (aula) of Attalus, king of Asia, to whom the Roman people were the successors. 9. Cortinae are hangings (aulaeum), that is, curtains, made out of skins. Such hangings can be read about in Exodus (26:14); the exterior of the tabernacle was covered by them. They are called cortinae from leather (coreum, i.e. corium), because they had been made earlier from skins. Whence also in that same tabernacle of the Law it is commanded that cortinae be made from the red hides of rams and from violet hides. 10. The Arabs call a covering woven from goat hair a cilicium, and from these they make tents for themselves.
xxvii. Wool (De lanis) 1. Wool (lana) is named from tearing (laniare), that is, plucking (vellere). Fleece (vel- lus) is also named from this, for in earlier times wool was plucked and not sheared. Flax (linum) originates from the earth, and its name is derived from Greek, for the Greeks call flax 2tv?ptov (lit. "thread"; cf. 2(c)vov, "flax"). Orelse it is so named because it is smooth and soft (lenis).
2. Tow (stuppa) may be from hemp or from flax. This is called stuppa according to the ancient spelling, because cracks in ships are packed (stipare) with it. Whence also comes the name of the stipatores (lit. "attendants, steve- dores"), who pack stuppa in hollows. 3. Stuffing (tomen- tum) is so named because it is 'fluffed up' (tumere) either in the thread or in the warp, and has no thin- ness. Hemp (cannabum) is named from its similarity to reeds (canna), or else from a Greek etymology, for they call hemp m?vvaßtç.
4. Byssum is a certain kind of flax that is especially white and soft. The Greeks call it papaten. Beaver (fib- rinus) wool comes from those animals that people call beavers (fiber). People claim that these are the same as those beavers (castor, another word for 'beaver') that, when hunters pursue them, bite off their own testicles (cf. XII.ii.21 above). The cobweb (aranea) is so named because it is fed by the flow of air (aer) in foliage. 5. Silk (sericum) is so named because the Seres (Chinese, or East Asians generally) were the first to provide it. It is there that the worms that spin silk threads around trees are thought to originate. The Greek name for these worms is ßóµßU(. Placium is a stuppa (see section 2 above), a kind of thick silk, and it is a Greek term.
xxviii. Colorings for cloth (De coloribus vestium) 1. Dying (tinctura) is so named because cloth is 'soaked in color' (tinguere), tinted to another appearance, and colored for the sake of beauty. What we call red or ver- milion (vermiculus), the Greeks call mómmoç; it is a small grub (vermiculus) from the foliage of the forest. 2. Purple (conchylium) is named because its color is collected from the marine conchula ("small mollusc"). This is also called ostrum (lit. the blood of a sea mollusc). 3. Ostrum, which is prepared for purple dye, is found in many places, but the best is on the island of Cyprus or in those places where the sun's path shines closer to the earth. 4. Conchylia (i.e. purple shellfish) are from the sea, and when they are cut all the way around with a blade, they exude tears of a purple color. Once these tears have been collected, pur- ple dye is prepared. Furthermore, ostrum is so named because it is drawn forth from the liquid of the shell (cf. ootp?ov, "bivalve shell, purple pigment").
5. Purple (purpura) was so named by Latin speakers from the purity (puritas) of its bright color. Among the Greeks it is called pop??ápa, with an aspirated p, while we say purpura with no aspiration. 6. Ferrugo is a blackish- purple dye that is made in Spain, as in (Vergil, Aen. 9.582):
Distinguished with Iberian ferrugo.
It is called ferrugo because all purple at the first dyeing has this color (i.e. that of the rust of iron, ferrum). 7. Glaucus dye is a blackish ferrugo. Elbidus (i.e. helvacea; cf. helvus, "yellowish," and XVII.v.26) is named from the color elbus, for elbus is the middle color between black and white, and the term elbus is taken from 'white' (albus). 8. Luteus is a reddish color that is saffron, for saffron is luteus of hue, as in (cf. Vergil, Eclogues 4.44):
He changed his fleece to a saffron yellow (lutum).
Menum [so called because it is a black color, for the Greeks call black µs2av]. Masticinum [so called because it has the color of mastic (mastix)]. Blatteum (i.e. pur- ple)... Blavum ... Mesticium  9. Osticium, because it
comes from usta (i.e. a type of red color; burnt cinnabar), for it is made from the soot, hanging from a ceiling, that is deposited by constant fire. For this reason the color of this dye is flame-like.
xxix. Tools for clothmaking (De instrumentis vestium) 1. Cloth (tela) is named for the length of its threads (cf. t?2ou, "afar"). The word 'loom' (telaria) is derived from it. Heddles (insubulus, cf. insilium) are so named because they are below (infra) and above (supra), or because they 'make a swishing sound' (insubulare, i.e. insibilare). Shuttles (radius) are so named because they are shaped by smoothing (radere). Combs (pecten) are so named because they comb out (pectere) the fibers and press them down. 2. The distaff (colus) because it is long and round like a column (columna). The spindle (fusus), because what has been spun is 'streamed out' (fundere, ppl. fusus) onto it. The alibrum is so called because on it threads are unwound (liberare), that is, loosened. 
3. The basket (calathus) is a light carrier made of flax or wicker or rushes. In it a day's weight (pensum, weighed- out wool to be spun) is placed or flowers are collected. In Greek 'wood' is m?2a (i.e. m?2ov; cf. m?2aµoç, "reed"), from which calathus is derived. It is called quasillum in Latin. Cicero says in the Philippics (3.10): "But in fact gold may be weighed out amid the baskets (quasillum)."
4. A 'measure of wool' (pensum) for women is named from weighing (pendere, ppl. pensus), whence also the words 'rations' (pensa) and 'expense' (impensa). Yarn (netum) .  5. Thread (filum) is so called either because
it is from the hair (pilus) of animals or because cloth- making takes place with fine threads like hair (pilus), that is, as if the word were filus. 6. Skein (mataxa), so called as if the word were metaxa, from the winding- around of threads, clearly, for a turning-point (meta) is a going-around - or it is because it is transferred (cf. µ?ta-, "trans-"; µ?t?ta(tç, "change of order"). Gubel- lum ("ball of yarn"; perhaps better lubellum of many manuscripts) is said incorrectly as a diminutive of ball (globus), as if the word were globellum. 7. The panulia ("bobbin" or "shuttle"; cf. panuncula, "thread wound on a bobbin in a shuttle") is so named because cloths
(pannus) are woven with them, for it runs back and forth through the loom.
The warp (stamen) is so named because it stands (stare) upright. The weft (trama), because it is brought through (transmittere) the loom in a straight path (cf. trames, "footpath"), for it is the thread running through the warp. The thrums (licium) are what join (ligare) the warps, as if the word were ligium. To 'line up the warp threads' (ordiri) is . . . To weave (texere) is . . . 
xxx. Ornaments (De ornamentis) 1. So far we have been talking about clothing: from this point we turn to other adornments. An ornament (ornamentum) is so named because one's face (os, gen. oris) and appearance are adorned by wearing it. The first article of jewelry was the crown (corona, also meaning "garland") as a mark of victory, or the sign of the king's honor. It was placed on the king's head to signify the populations spread around the globe, by whom he was surrounded just as his head was crowned. This is called a corolla by Lucilius (Satires 1143) anda ot????v? by Homer (Iliad 8.597). The pagans claim that it had its origins with a certain Liber, because they established the practice of binding with these bands a head affected by drinking wine. That is why crowns were once made of a kind of linen or wool, as they were for pagan priests.
2. The word 'band' (corona, i.e. "a circle of people") is so named for this reason, because in the beginning peo- ple would run (currere) around altars, so that a crown was both formed and named according to the image of a circling or a 'group of dancers' (chorus). 3. The Roman emperors and certain pagan kings wear gold crowns. The Persians wear turbans (tiara), the kings wearing straight ones and the satraps curved ones. The turban was invented by the Assyrian queen Semiramis; that nation has retained this type of ornament from then up until today. The Athenians used to wear gold 'cicadas' (cic[l]ada), some of them on the top of the head and some over the forehead. Indeed, not all kings wear the same kinds of regalia.
The pagan seers used to wear infulae, apices, pillea, or galeria. 4. An infula is a small white band for a priest's head, shaped like a diadem. Fillets hang down on either side of it and fasten the infula, whence also fillets (vitta) are so named, because they fasten (vincire). Most infulae were wide and twisted, and made out ofwhite and scarlet.
5. 
The apex (i.e. a conical cap with a rod attached to its peak) isa needlework pilleum that pagan priests used to wear. It is named from fastening (apere), that is, binding, for the rod that was on the pilleum was fastened on by thread made from the wool of a sacrificed animal. The galerium (i.e. galerum) is a pilleum made out of skin from a slaughtered sacrificial victim. Pilleum (i.e. a close- fitting cap) is named from the skin (pellis) of the sacrifice, from which it used to be made. 6. The cidaris (i.e. the head-dress of a high priest) was itself something priestly, and is called a mitra by most people.
xxxi. Women's head ornaments (De ornamentis capi- tis feminarum) 1. Ornaments for women's heads are: the diadem, the nimbus, the capitulum and the mitra. The diadem (diadema) is a head ornament for matrons, interwoven with gold and gems. It is fastened at the back with the ends brought to meet one another, and for this reason it is named in Greek, because it is 'tied round' (cf. 6t?, "across," 6?±v, "bind"). 2. The nimbus is a transverse headband made of gold, sewn onto a linen cloth, and is worn by women over the forehead. Plautus (The Little Carthaginian 348) says:
The more I look at her, the more she is 'crowned with a nimbus' (nimbatus).
The light that is depicted as being around the heads of angels is called a nimbus, although a nimbus is also the dense part of a cloud (nubis). 3. A hood (capitu- lum) is commonly called a capitulare. This is also called a cappa (i.e. another word for 'hood,' or perhaps 'ker- chief '), because it has two tips like the letter kappa, or because it is an ornament for the head (caput).
4. A mitra (i.e. a kind of head-dress, a bonnet) is a Phrygian pilleum (i.e. a cap), covering the head, the sort of ornament worn on the heads of women who have taken religious vows. But a pilleum is for men, and a mitra for women. 5. And redimicula are what the mitra is tied on with. A pilleum, as we said above, was made from
skin, but a mitra is made of wool. The ricula (i.e. a small veil) is a mitra for the head ofa virgin. 6. Fillets are what are fastened in the hair; they gather up loose hair, and they are called fillets (vitta) because they bind (vincire). The taenia (i.e. ribbon) is the end of the fillet, and it hangs down in various colors. Again, a crown is tied on witha fillet, and the taenia is the lowest part of the fillet, the part that hangs down from the crown. 7. A hair-net (reticulum) is what gathers the hair, so named because it 'holds hair' (retinere crines), so that it is not loose. 8. The discriminale for women's heads is so named because it parts the head (i.e. the hair) with gold, for 'to part' means 'to separate' (discriminare).
Antiae are the curls hanging down around the ear- lobes. It is from a Greek word, 'opposite' (i.e. ?vt(c)oç) the ears. 9. The hairpin (acus) is what holds an arrange- ment for adorning women's hair in place, lest strands of hair fall loose and fly about here and there. 10. Earrings (inaures) are named from the pierced places of the ears (auris), from which precious beads of stone hang. They were worn this way in Greece: girls would wear them in both ears, and boys would wear them only in the right ear. 11. Torques (torquis) are gold circles hanging from the neck onto the chest. Both torques and bullae (i.e. lockets for amulets) are worn by men, but women wear monilia (necklaces) and catellae (neck-chains). Torques are so called because they are twisted (torquere), and bullae because in their roundness they are like a bubble (bulla) inflated in the water by the wind.
12. A monile is an ornament made out of gems, which would be hung around the neck by women. It is named from 'gift' (munus). This is also called a ser- pentum because it consists of certain gold beads (lit. "small amphoras") and various gemstones arranged in the shape of a serpent. Some people call this a segmen- tum, as Juvenal does (Satires 2.124):
Segmenta (properly, "flounces") and long clothes.
However, we also speak of clothing as 'trimmed' (segmentatus; cf. xxii.18 above), as in the same author (6.89):
And the little girl would have slept in a flounced (segmentatus) cradle.
13. 
However, frequently any of a matron's ornaments is referred to by the term munile (i.e. monile) - whichever ones are given to her as a gift (munus). 14.A murena (lit. "eel") is so called in common usage, because a chain of a flexible kind, made of pliant tube-beads of gold metal, suitable for adorning the neck, is made in the likeness of a serpentine murena. Sometimes this is constructed from tube-beads of gold and of silver. Whence also it is said in the Song of Songs (1:10): "We will make thee chains (murenulae) of gold, inlaid with silver."
15. Catellae are chainlets (catenula) for the neck, link- ing to each other like chains (catena), whence they are named. 16. Bracelets (dextra, i.e. dextrale) are worn by both men and women, because both sexes wear them on the right hand (dextera). Armbands (armilla) are, properly speaking, for men (vir), conferred on soldiers in recognition of a victory for their valor (virtus) in arms (arma). For this reason they were sometimes also com- monly called viriolae (perhaps read viriliae). An armilla is no different from a bracelet (circulus) in what it signi- fies, because it also encloses something by encircling the place where it is put, but an armilla is more extended in depth and a circulus is rounded. 17. Fibulae (i.e. pins or brooches) are used toadorn awoman's breast or are worn by men to hold a cloak over their shoulders, or a belt around their hips. Lunulae are ornaments for women; they are small pendent gold balls shaped like the moon (luna).
18. Mirrors (speculum) are what women use to look at their faces. A mirror is so named either because the reflection is produced from its brightness (splendor) or because women looking in it study the appearance (species) of their face and add whatever ornament they see is lacking. 19. Ankle bracelets (periscelis) are orna- ments for women's legs, which adorn their appearance as they walk by. 'Scent bottles' (olfactoriolum) are small vessels for women, in which perfumes are carried.
xxxii. Rings (De anulis) 1. Prometheus is said to have been the first to put on his finger a circle of iron with a stone set into it; following this practice people began to wear rings. Rings (anulus) are named as a diminutive from the circlets and hoops (anus) that go around the arms and legs. Likewise the signets (signum) of rings are as a diminutive called sigilla. A signum is larger, and a sigillum is like a smaller signum. 2. People first began
to wear rings on the fourth (i.e. third) finger from the thumb, because a certain vein reaches from it to the heart, and the ancients thought that this vein should be noted and adorned by some sort of sign.
3. Among the Romans, rings would be distributed from the public treasury, and not indiscriminately, for rings with gems were given as an honor to men of excep- tional merit, and plain rings to the rest. A slave or freed- man would not wear a gold ring in public. Freeborn men wore gold rings, freedmen silver, and slaves iron, although many very worthy men also would wear iron rings. 4. Among the ancients it was a disreputable prac- tice for a man to wear more than one ring. Gracchus says in the Against Maevius (unique fragment): "Con- sider his left hand, O Quirites - see whose authority we are following: someone who is adorned like a woman on account of his lust for women." Crassus, who perished among the Parthians, had two rings in his old age, giv- ing as his pretext the fact that that he had accumulated immense wealth. Many Romans refrained, in their dig- nity, from wearing a ring on their finger. Women did not wear rings except for the ones given to them as maidens by their fiance´s, and they used to wear not more than two gold rings on their fingers. But nowadays when it comes to gold, no part of a woman's body is left light and unencumbered.
5. Among the types of rings are the ungulus, the Samothracian, and the Thynian. An ungula has a gem- stone, and is called by this name because the gem of this ring is set in gold just as a claw (ungula) is set in flesh. A Samothracian ring is certainly gold, but with an iron capital. It is named from the place. 6. A Thynian ring is unadorned. It was first manufactured in Bithynia, which was once called Thynia. Flaccus (i.e. Maecenas's poem addressed to Horace, fr. 1):
O Flaccus Lucentus, my life, I seek for myself neither emeralds nor glittering beryl, nor white pearls, nor those little rings that the Thynian (Tunnicus) file has polished, nor jasper stones. 
xxxiii. Belts (De cingulis) 1. A cinctus is a wide belt (zona), while a semicinctium is less wide, and a cingu- lum is less than either, for the word cingulum is formed
as a diminutive from cinctus. Young men at athletic (campester) exercises used to conceal their private parts with a cinctum, whence it is also called a campestris. 2. A baldric (balteum) is a military belt, so named because military insignia hang from it, showing the total num- ber of men in the military legion, that is, 6600, of which number the soldiers themselves are a part. Balteus is the name not only for what one girds on, but also for what weapons hang from. 3. Zona is Greek (cf. SÛv?, "belt, girdle"); what they call SYv?ptç (cf. SYv?ptov, "belt") we call a cingulum. A strophium is a gold cingulum with gems. Cinna says this of it (cf. Catullus, Poems 64.65):
With a strophium encircling milk-white breasts.
And Prudentius (Crowns of Martyrdom 4.25):
This is the name of the gem fastened on the strophium.
4.A limus is an apron that public slaves used to wear, and it was called limus because it had purple bands that were slanted, that is, oblique (limus). A caltulum is a kind of girdle, named from its 'constraining strap' (cogere, ppl. coactus + lorum).
Fibula ("pin" or "brooch") is a Greek word, which they call fiblis (cf. ??(c)ß2a or ??tß2(c)ov, "brooch"), because it binds (ligare). Subfibulum (i.e. a white four-cornered veil)... Loincloth (subligaculum).  5. The redimiculum
is what we call an apron or a bracile, because it comes down from the nape and is divided on either side of the neck, passing under each armpit and tying around below from either side, in such a way that it pulls in the breadth of the garment as it clothes the body, drawing it together and arranging it by means of its fastening (cf. xxxi.5 above). Common people call this a brachilis, as if the word were brachialis (i.e. "bracelet" in classical Latin), even though nowadays it is not a belt about the arms (brachium) but about the loins. An apron (succinc- torium) is so called because, as we have said, it is drawn under the arms, goes around under the armpits and is secured below (succingere), coming from either side.
6. A fascia is a band that covers the chest and binds the breasts, and the chest is quite tightly bound with its crimped belt. It is called a fascia because it ties around the body like tying up a packet (fasciculus). Hence also bandages (fasciolae), with which wounds are bound up.
7. A fillet (vitta) is so called because it binds (vincire) the chest like a clinging vine (vitis).A border (limbus) is what we call trimming. 8. It is a band that goes around
the edges of clothing, woven either of thread or of gold, and sewn onto the outside lower edge of the garment or cloak. Vergil says of it (Aen. 4.137):
Clothed in a Sidonian cloak with embroidered border (limbus).
xxxiv. Footwear (De calciamentis) 1. Shoemakers (sutor) are so named because they sew (suere), that is, they stitch together, with boar bristles (seta; and cf. sus, "pig") worked into their thread, as if the word were setor.
2. But bootmakers (caligarius) are so called not from the thick skin (callum) of the foot, but from the last (calum, i.e. cala, lit. "wood"; cf. m?2ov, "wood"), that is, the wood, without which shoes cannot be sewn together; the Greeks call this a ma2ópoUç ("shoemaker's last," lit. "wooden foot"). At first they were only made from wil- low. Hence shoes (calciamentum) are named because they are made on lasts (calum), that is, wood, or because they are 'trodden upon' (calcare).
3. The Greeks used sandals, which had been invented earlier. This is a kind of shoe with a single shape, the same shape being suited to either foot, whether the right or the left. These sandals (crepida) are so named because they are fastened with a noise, or from the pattering (crepitus) of feet while walking. 4. Kings and Caesars used to wear the shoe called calceus. Their shape . . . Romulus invented patrician (patricius) shoes, with four laces and a moon (i.e. a half-moon shaped badge) sewn on them; only patricians used to wear these. The moon on them did not represent the image of the celestial body but a sign of the number one hundred (i.e. C), because in the beginning there were one hundred patrician senators.
5. Greaves (ocrea) are 'shoes' for the shins, so named because they cover the legs (crus). The coturnus (i.e.
cothurnus, a high, thick-soled boot) was what used to be worn by tragic actors when they were about to speak in the theater and chant poems in a deep, resonant voice. It was a shoe like the sandal that heroes used to wear, but such that it fits both the right foot and the left. 6. Baxeae are shoes worn by comic actors, parallel to the coturni of tragic actors. Some people call them calones because they are made from willow, for the Greeks, as we have said, call wood m?2a (i.e. m?2ov). 7. Talares (i.e. talaria) are slippers (soccus) that seem to be so named because they are so shaped that they come to the ankles (talus); similarly subtolares, because they come below (sub) the ankle, as if the term were subtalares.
8. Obstrigilli (i.e. another kind of sandal) are stitched along the sole, and have lacing on the uppers so that they can be fastened (constringere) by drawing it tight; this gives them their name. 9.I think that osae were first made from bone (os), and although they are now made from other materials, people have retained the original name.
10. Mullei are similar to coturni (see section 5 above), with elevated soles, but the upper part has a buckle- tongue (malleolus) of bone or brass, to which thongs are fastened. They are named from their red color, the sort of color a mullet (mullus) fish has. 11. Soleae only cover the soles of the feet, and are named from the sole (solum) of the foot. Wooden soleae are made of wood covered by leather. 12. Slippers (soccus), whose diminutive is socellus, are so named because they have a 'bag' (saccus) in which part of the foot is put. Callicula (i.e. gallicula, a small Gallic shoe) . . .
Boots (caliga) are named either from the thick skin (callum) of the foot or because they are laced (ligare), for socci are not laced, but only slipped on. 13. Cernui are slippers with no soles. Lingulati (lit. "tongue-shaped") are the ones we call foliatus (lit. "leaf-shaped"). Nailed (clavatus) shoes, [as if the word were claviatus, because the soles are joined to the uppers with small - that is, sharp - nails (clavus)]. 'Fur-lined boots' (perones) and sculponeae are country shoes. Baxea are women's shoes. Laces (corrigia) are named from leather (corium) or from binding (colligatio), as if the word were colligia.
