i. Authors on rural matters (De auctoribus rerum rus- ticarum) 1. Among the Greeks, Hesiod of Boeotia was the first to make skill in writing on rural matters a part of a liberal education; then Democritus. Mago of Carthage also wrote a study of agriculture in twenty-eight vol- umes. Among the Romans Cato was first to treat of agriculture, then Marcus Terence (i.e. Varro) refined its study, and then Vergil exalted it with the commendation of his poems. No lesser inquiry was made later by Cor- nelius Celsus, Julius Atticus, Aemilianus (i.e. Palladius), and the distinguished orator Columella who embraced the whole corpus of that discipline.
2. They say that the first person who yoked oxen to the
plow was a certain private citizen, who had been struck by lightning, named Homogirus - but some say Osiris was the inventor of this craft, and some say Triptolemus. Here the question is in what manner Ceres in Greece first established the turning of the soil with iron - with what- ever kind of iron implement, not specifically with the plowshare or plow. 3. A certain man named Stercutus first brought the technique of dunging (stercorare) fields to Italy, and his altar in Rome was dedicated by Picus. He invented many agricultural tools, and was the first to enrich fields. Some have thought that this man was Saturn, in order to do him greater honor by that name under which he would sound magnificent and would procure dignity from the title.
ii. The cultivation of fields (De cultura agrorum)
1. Cultivation (cultura) is the means by which crops or wines are procured with great labor, so called from 'inhabiting' (incolere; cf. colere, ppl. cultus, "cultivate"). The wealth of the ancients inhered in two things: good pasturing and good tilling. The cultivation of fields involves ashes, plowing, lying fallow, burning of stub- ble, dunging, hoeing, and weeding. 2. Ashes (cinis) is the burning (incendium) by which a field exudes useless moisture. Plowing (aratio) is so called because people first carried out the cultivation of land with bronze (aes, gen. aeris) before the use of iron was discovered. There
are two kinds of plowing: spring and fall. 'Lying fallow' (intermissio) is the means by which a field, empty in alternate years, renews its vigor.
3. Dunging (stercoratio) is the spreading of fertilizer. Dung (stercus) is so called either because it is spread (sternere) on fields, or because that which overflows as filth in the city needs to be "washed off" (extergere, as if ec-stergere), [or, what is more likely, from the name Sterce, also called Sterculus]. Dung is also called drop- pings (fimus), which is dropped on fields. And it is called fimus [because "a mouse is made" (fiat mus)], that is, dung, which commonly is called fertilizer (laetamen) because with its nourishment it makes seeds fertile (lae- tus) and renders fields rich and fecund.
4. Hoeing is done after the planting, when farmers after unyoking the oxen split the large clods and break them apart with hoes, and it is called hoeing (occatio) as if it were 'blinding' (occaecatio), because it covers the seeds. To hoe therefore is to cover seeds, vines, or trees with earth. 5. Weeding (runcatio) is to pluck weed- grasses from the land, for the land is rus ("farmland"). A furrow (sulcus) is so named from 'sun' (sol), because when plowed it receives the sun. 'Newly plowed fallow' (vervactum) is so called as if it were 'done in springtime' (vere actum), that is, land plowed in spring. Ground- breaking (proscissio) is the first plowing, when the field is still hard. 6. Sowing (satio) is so called as if it were 'the action of the seed' (seminis actio), as if it were 'the action of the sowers' (satorumactio). Moreoveritiscalled sowing (serere), because it ought to be done when the sky is clear (serenus), not in rain. Hence is derived that Vergilian phrase (Geo. 1.299):
Naked plow, naked sow (serere).
Harvest (messis) is named from 'reaping' (metere), that is, cutting back. 7.A grain-field (seges) is [so called] from the seed (semen) that we cast, or from 'cutting' (sectio).
iii. Fruits of the earth (De frumentis) 1. Ceres was first in Greece to make use of grain and to raise crops from seeds brought from another place. Ovid records this, saying (Met. 5.341):
Ceres first broke up the earth with her curved plow, she first brought grains and kindly food to the lands.
2. Grains (frumentum) are properly those that have ears, and crops (frux) are the other fruits of the earth. Grain or crops are named from enjoying (frui), that is, from eating, for the top part of the throat is called the frumen.
3. First-fruits (primitiae) are properly those which are first gathered from the crops. 4. Wheat (triticum) is so called either from threshing (tritura), by means of which it may be stored in a barn after being thoroughly sifted, or because its grain is milled and 'ground up' (terere, ppl. tritum).
5. Spelt (far) is so called because at first it would be crushed (frangere), for among the ancients the use of mills did not yet exist, but they would place grain in a mortar and crush it, and this was a kind of milling. 6. 'Emmer wheat' (adoreum) is a species of wheat that is commonly called seed (semen). It was formerly called ador from 'eating' (edere), because it was what people first used, or because in a sacrifice bread of that kind was offered 'at altars' (ad aras) - whence furthermore sacrifices are called adorea (i.e. an honorary gift of grain).
7. 'Winter wheat' (siligo), a type of wheat, is named from 'choice' (selectus, ppl. of seligere), for this type is excellent for bread.
8. 'Three-month spring' (trimestris) wheat is so named because it is gathered three months after sow- ing, for where a seasonable sowing is skipped because of water or some other reason, people look to it as a safeguard. 9. Alica ("emmer groats") is a Greek word. Alicastrum is similar to alica, outstanding for weight and quality. 10. Barley (hordeum) is so called because it becomes dry (aridum) before other types of grain, or because its ear has rows (ordo) of grain. There are three kinds of barley. The first is called hexaticum (i.e. hexastichus; cf. s(, "six"; ot(c)yoç, "row") because its ear has six rows. Some call this type horse-barley (canter-
inum) because it feeds animals better than wheat, and feeds humans more nutritiously than poor wheat. The second is distichon barley, because it has two rows; many call this Galaticum. The third is three-month (trimestris) because, when necessary, it is sown in spring and quickly gathered.
11. 'Gallic spelt' (scandula) is named from 'division,' for it has two forms and it is split (scandere, i.e. scindere)- that is, it is divided. 12. Centenum (probably "rye") is so called because in most places where it is cast it grows with a hundredfold (centesimus) increase over its seed. Millet (milium) likewise is named from the multiplicity of its crop (cf. milia, "thousands"). 13. 'Panic grass' (panicium) is so called because in many regions people are sustained by it 'in place of bread' (panis vice), as if the word were panivicium. Meal (pistum) is from 'something fed' (pas- tus). Sesame (sisamum) is a Greek term (i.e. o?oaµov).
14. 'Mixed grain' (farrago) is named from spelt (far); it is a barley-type grass, still green, with its grain not yet swollen to ripeness.
15. We speak improperly of the 'ear' (spica) of ripe fruit, for properly the ear exists when the beards, still thin like spear-tips (spiculum), project through the husk of the stalk, that is the swelling tip. 16. The beard (arista) is so called because it is the first to dry up (arescere). The stalk (culmus) is the stem (calamus) of the ear as it rises from the roots, and it is called culmus as if the word were calamus. 17. The husk (folliculum) is the sheath of the ear inside of which the grain is protected. Fur- nished with a rampart, it stretches its defense over the ear so that the ear may not be stripped of its fruit by the pecking of the smaller birds, or trampled by footsteps.
18. Blades are the leaves or sheaths with which the stalk is surrounded and propped so that it is not bent over by the weight of the grain, and they surround the stalk. The blade (stipula, also meaning "stubble") is so called from 'burnt' (ustus, ppl. of urere) as if the word were ustipula. Stubble is named from burning, because when the harvest is gathered, the stubble is burned for the cul- tivation of the field. Or again, it is called stipula because part of it is burned while part of it is mown for straw (palea).
19. Some say chaff (palea) is so called because it is winnowed with a spade (pala) to separate out the grain. Pagans however derive the name chaff from a certain Pales, the discoverer of grain crops, whom they would
identify with Ceres. Concerning her Vergil writes (cf.
Geo. 3.1):
You also, great Pales, in your memory we will sing.
Still others say chaff took its name from 'fodder' (pabu- lum), because at first it alone was offered for the feeding of animals. Chaff's property is to be contrary: so cold that it does not permit snow blanketed with it to melt, yet so warm that it forces fruits to ripen.
iv. Legumes (De leguminibus) 1. Legumes (legumen) are so called from picking (legere), as if they were 'picked out' (eligere, ppl. electus), for the ancients would pick all the better ones - or because they are picked by hand and do not need cutting. 2. There are several species of legumes, of which the fava bean, lentil, pea, French bean, chickpea, and lupine seed seem most favored for human consumption. 3. The 'fava bean' (faba) derived its name in a Greek etymology from 'eating,' as if it were faga, for in Greek ??ay?±v means "to eat." Indeed humans con- sumed this legume first. It has two types, one common and the other Egyptian. 4. 'Ground fava' (faba fresa) is so called because people grind(frendere, ppl. fresum) it, that is crush it, and pulverize it by milling. 5. The lentil (lentis, i.e. lens) is so named because it is moist and soft (lentus), or because it adheres to the soil (cf. lentus, "sticky").
6. 'French bean' (faselum; cf. ???o?2oç) and chickpea (cicer; cf. mptóç) are Greek names. But faselum . . . 7. Lupine (lupinus) is alsoa Greek term, about which Vergil wrote (Geo. 1.75):
And the sad lupines (lupinus),
because with their bitterness they make the taster's face look sad (cf. 2Up?póç, "causing sorrow") - hence on account of their bitterness neither worms nor any other animal eats them.
8. Lucerne clover, vetch, and bitter vetch are the best fodders. Lucerne (medica) is so called because it was brought into Greece from the Medes when Xerxes, king of the Persians, invaded it. Once sown, this lasts ten years, and can be reaped four or six times a year. 9. Vetch (vicia) is so named because it scarcely (vix) bears a triple yield, while other legumes have a fertile produce. Hence Vergil (Geo. 1.75):
Or the scanty yield of the vetch (vicia).
10. The pea (pisum) is so called because by it a minute quantity of gold would be 'weighed out' (pensare) - for pis means "gold." 11. 'Bitter vetch' (ervum) derives its name from Greek, for they call it opoßoç, because while it is dangerous for some livestock it nevertheless makes bulls (cf. ßouç, "bull") plump.
v. Vines (De vitibus) 1. Noah first established the plant- ing of vines in an age still without cultivation. However, the Greeks call the discoverer of the vine Liber, whence the pagans after his death would have it that he was a god. 2. It is calleda vine (vitis) because it has the capac- ity (vis) for taking root easily. Others think that they are called vines because they entwine themselves about one another with 'ribbon-like stems' (vitta, "fillet," a strip of cloth) and fasten themselves to neighboring (vicinus) trees with their creeping growth. They are flexible in nature, and whatever they embrace they bind tight as if with a kind of arms. 3. The labrusca is a wild vine that grows in marginal land, whence it is called labrusca, from the margins (labrum) and extremities of the land.
4. Atrunk(codex) is so called as if it were caudex. Like- wise the ancients would say clodus for claudus ("lame").
5. Vine-shoots (sarmentum) are from 'sowing' (serere), [as if the word were serimentum]. A mallet-shoot (malle- olus) is a sweet young vine-shoot sprung from a young branch of the prior year, and named for its likeness to the thing, because at the section where it is cut from the old shoot the protuberance on both sides looks like a hammer (malleus). 6. Eunuchs (spado) are shoots lack- ing fruit, so named because they are unable to bear fruit and are afflicted with sterility. 7. Country people call the newest part of the shoot an 'arrow' (sagitta), either because it has gone off quite far from the mother-stem and as it were shoots forth, or because it has the look of a dart with the thinness of its point. 8. The top parts of vines and bushes are called switches (flagellum), because they are stirred by the breeze (flatus).
9. The shoot (palmes) of a vine is the soft material that, extending as tender young branches, bears the fruit. Country people call that part of the vine the palmes for this reason: palmes is a diminutive noun, which is called a 'noun with a changed ending' (nomen paragogum; see I.xxxv.3), because it is derived from palma (palm tree). Palma presents the prototype name, which is called the 'principal,' because it can form a derivative from itself.
10. Vine-foliage (pampinus) consists of the leaves by whose aid the vine defends itself from cold or heat and is protected from every injury. Therefore it is pruned in some places so that it both lets in sun for the ripening of the fruit and also makes shade. It is called pampi- nus because it 'hangs from the shoot' (de palmite pen- deat). 11. Tendrils (capreolus) are so called because they seize (capere) trees, for they are the curls or little hooks by which vines will interlace themselves and hang from trees. Thanks to their support the shoots can scorn winds and turbulence, hold up their fruit without any danger of falling, and defend themselves along their rambling length. 12. Corymbi are the curling tendrils that bind and hold fast to whatever is nearest, so that shoots are not loosed too far out and torn away by blasts of wind.
13. Grapes (uva) are so called because they are full of liquid inside, of juice and succulence, for what has mois- ture on the outside is humidus, and on the inside, uvidus.
14. Berry (acinus)... Cluster (botrus) .. .A cluster-stalk (racemus, i.e. the stem of a cluster) is a part of a botryo, and botryo (i.e. 'cluster') is a Greek word (i.e. ßótpUç).
15. Some grapes are called 'suburban' because their produce is sold in cities as fresh fruit, because both their appearance and the agreeableness of their taste commend them. Types of these are the early-ripening, the hard, the purple, the finger-long, the Rhodian, the Libyan, the thunderbolt, the crown, the three-foot, the inch-long, and the Cydonian. Those that last through the whole winter are the vennuculan and the Numisian.
16. The early-ripening (praecox) are so called because they come to maturity early and are warmed by the sun before all the others. The Greeks call these lagean grapes, because they rush to ripeness as quickly as a hare (cf. 2ayÛç, "hare").
17. Purple (purpureus) grapes are named for their color; inch-long (unciarius) for their size; finger-long (dactylus) for their length; crown (stephanitus) for their roundness. Rhodian and Libyan are named from regions, but thunderbolt grapes because they glow red as
fire. 18. Moreover, there are very many species of grapes that are used for wine. Of these, Aminean is so called as if it were 'without redness' (sine minium), that is, lack- ing redness, for it makes a white wine. Although it has one name, it produces more than one type; the Aminean 'twin' (duae geminae) so called because it yields double grapes, and the Aminean 'woolly' (lanatus), because it has a woolly down, more so than others. The rubellian grape is so called because its woody part is red (cf. ruber, "red").
19. Faecinian grapes have tiny berries and tough skin; they trail Aminean grapes in quality and surpass them in fecundity. They call it the faecinian grape because it produces more wine-lees (faex, gen. faecis) than other grapes. 20. Muscatel (apianus) grapes makea sweet wine. Unless you pick them quickly they will be injured by rain and wind and especially bees (apis); they are named apian because of the bees' depredations. 21. Balanite grapes receive that name because of their size, because in Greek anacornis called ß?2avoç. 22. The Biturican grape is allotted its name from its region. It withstands whirl- winds, rain, and heat very hardily, and it does not wither in poor land. The basilisk grape also has this advantage.
23. The argitis is a Greek vine of the white type (cf.
?pyóç, "white"), fecund, producing a huge woody stock and a short, wide leaf; its fruit, unless you gather it at the beginning of the season, either falls to the earth or rots from the damp. 24. The inerticula grape, which the Greeks call amaricion, is black. It makes a good, light wine - whence it takes its name, because it is considered weak (iners) with regard to debilitating one's strength, although it is not feeble in taste. 25. Mareotic grapes are named from the region of Egypt, Mareotis, from which they first came. They are both white and black.
26. Helvola grapes, which some call 'variegated,' are so called from their color, neither purple nor black but dun (helvus), although their must is whitish - for dun has dark and light in its color: it is neither light nor dark as such.
27. In third place are the vines notable for their fecun- dity only, abundant in their yield and productive of a good quantity of wine. 28. The viticionia vine has large rather than numerous grapes, and thence receives its name because it produces a great deal of wine. The Syriac grape is so called either because it was brought
from Syria or because it is black. 29. Moreover there are many species of vines that, with a change of locality, lose both their character and their name.
30. Among others, these activities are most appropri- ate for vines: loosening the soil, pruning, propagation, and digging. 31. To 'loosen the soil' (oblaqueare) is to lay open the soil around the stock and to form hollows to hold water; some call this 'clearing the root' (excodicare).
32. To prune (putare) is to cut back superfluous branches from the vine where the top growth is luxuriant, for to prune is to cleanse, that is to cut off (amputare). 33. To train (traducere) a vine is to 'lead it across' (transduc- ere). To propagate (propaginare) is to stretch a shoot of the vine to be buried in the soil, and then as it were to 'fasten it at a distance' (porro pangere). Hence the term 'progeny' (propago), so called from propagate and 'stretch out' (protendere). To dig (fodere) is to makea pit (fovea), as if the term were fovere.
vi. Trees (De arboribus) 1. The term 'tree' (arbor), as well as 'small plant' (herba), is thought to be modified from the word 'field' (arvum), because they cling to the earth with fixed roots. The terms resemble one another because the one grows from the other. When you have cast the seeds on the ground first the small plant springs up, and when it is tended it grows into a tree, and within a short time what you had seen as a small plant you gaze up to as a sapling. 2. A sapling (arbustum) is a new and pliant tree, in which a graft can be made, and it is called arbustum as if it were 'the spear of a tree' (arboris hasta). Others would take arbustum as the place where trees grow, like the term for 'willow thicket' (salictum); and likewise (i.e. with a similar derivational ending) virectum ("greensward"), where there are new and green (virere) bushes.
3. The word arbor for 'tree' refers to both fruit-bearing and sterile trees, but arbos only to fruit-bearing. We decline words for trees in the feminine gender, but words for their fruits in the neuter. 4.A shrub (frutex) is a short growth, so called because by its foliage it covers (fronde tegit) the ground; the plural of this word is 'shrubbery' (frutectum). But a tree (arbor) is tall. 5. A thicket (silva) is a dense and small grove. Silva is so called as if the word were xylva, because there wood is felled, for the Greeks call wood (á2ov - for many Latin terms com- monly have a Greek etymology. 6. A grove (nemus) is named for divinity (numen), because pagans set up their
idols there, for groves are sites with larger trees, shady with foliage. 7.A 'sacred grove' (lucus) is a dense thicket of trees that lets no light come to the ground, named by way of antiphrasis because it 'sheds no light' (non lucere). Or it is named from 'light' (lux, gen. lucis) because in it torches or candles used to give off light against the darkness of the grove.
8. A glade (saltus) is a high thicket of trees, called by this name because it 'springs up' (exsilire) on high and rises aloft. 9. An aviaria is a hidden grove so called because it is the haunt of birds (avis). 10. 'Second growth' (recidivum) with regard to trees consists of what sprouts again after other parts have been cut. Some say that recidivum is from 'falling' (cadere), because they make new growth after being felled. Others have said that it is from 'cutting back' (recidere) and sprouting again. Therefore something may be recidivus (i.e. "restored") where there has been death or falling.
11. We speak of grafting (insitio) when, after the stem is split, a scion from a fertile tree is grafted (inserere, ppl. insitus) onto a sterile tree; or, it is the implanting of buds when, after the bark is sliced open, the bud of a foreign tree is set into the inner bark. 12. Cuttings (planta) are from trees, but seedlings (plantaria) are grown from seed and are transplanted with their roots from their origi- nal soil. 13. Turf (caespes) is a low growth, as if the term were 'spears' (cuspis) or 'around the feet' (circa pedes). Branches (frons) are so called because they 'produce' (ferre) shoots or shade, for they are the cause of shade. Eyes (oculus) are the nodes from which branches grow.
14. The root (radix) is so called because fixed in the ground in the manner of 'radiating spokes' (radius), as it were, it goes down deep, for natural philosophers say that the depth of the roots is equal to the height of the trees. Others say roots are named for their similarity to rays (radius), or because, if they are cut away (eradere), they do not grow back.
15. The trunk (truncus) is the standing part of a tree, and it rests on the root. The ancients called bark (cortex) the corux; it is named cortex because it covers the wood witha skin(corium). 16. Liber is the inner part of the bark, so called from the bark's being 'released' (liberare), that is, set apart, for it is a kind of medium between bark and wood. 17. Branches (ramus) are what extend from the trunk, just as from little branches (ramusculus) yet oth- ers grow. Shoots (serculus) are so named because they are cut with a saw (serra). 18. A sucker (virgultum) is what
springs up from a root; a branch, from the woody part of a tree; a twig (virga), from a branch. Properly, however, what grows up at the root of a tree and is lopped off as useless by farmers is called a sucker. It is called virgultum because it is 'removed from a twig' (ex virga tollere). A twig (virga) is so named [moreover from 'vigor' (vis)] or from 'strength' (virtus) because it contains a great deal of vigor, or from 'greenness' (viriditas), or because it is a symbol of peace (i.e. as a lictor's rod), because it controls force (vis). For this reason magicians use wands (virga) to make serpents calm towards each other, and there- fore they hold them up tied to a wand (cf. the caduceus; see VIII.xi.47 and the footnote there). Indeed, philoso- phers, kings, teachers, messengers, and envoys use wands.
19. Switches (flagellum), as I said above (v.8 above), are the highest parts of trees, because they sustain the repeated blasts (flatus) of wind. 20.A cyme (cyma) is so called as if the word were 'hair' (coma). A leaf (folium) is called ??á22ov in Greek, and this name was carried over to our language by borrowing. 21. Flowers (flos, pl. flores) are so called because they quickly drop (defluere) from trees, as if the word were fluores, for they are quickly released. These are doubly pleasing: in color and in scent. They are wilted by the south wind, produced by the west wind. 22. We call a fertile, swelling growth a bud (germen), from 'bearing' (gerere); whence also the term 'germination' (germinatio). 23. Produce (fructus) takes its name from frumen, that is, the higher part of the throat, through which we ingest. Whence also 'crops' (frux). Properly speaking, produce is what comes from fields and trees, especially what we make use of, but we speak of 'produce' with regard to animals incorrectly and metaphorically.
24. Fruit (pomum) is named from 'abundant' (opimus), that is from the abundance of its fruitful growth. Fruits are called ripe (maturus) because they are ready for eating (mandere); likewise, unripe (immatu- rus), because before they become ripe they are too hard for eating. 25. Firewood (lignum) is so called because when kindled it is converted into light (lumen). Whence likewise the lamp (lichnium) is so called, because it gives light (see vii.65 below). 26. A splinter (astula) is named from 'raising' (tollere) [as if it were 'split away' (abstula)]. Tinder (fomes) is composed of splinters that are cast off from trees by lopping, or charred shavings, or hollowed- out firewood. It takes its name from 'dried fungus'
(fungus), because they catch fire in the same way. Of these, Vergil says (Aen. 1.176):
And he struck flame in the tinder (fomes).
27. A fire-brand (torris) is a burnt piece of wood, com- monly called titio, taken from the hearth half-burnt and with the fire out. 28. Sweepings (quisquiliae) are stubble mixed with branches and dry leaves; they are the rubbish of the land. Rot (caries) is the decayed matter of wood, called this because it occurs in wood that lacks (carere) solidity.
vii. Specific names of trees (De propriis nominibus arborum) 1. The palm (palma) is so called because it adorns the hand of a conqueror, or because it has branches spread out in the manner of a human palm (palma). This tree is the symbol of victory, with high and handsome growth, clothed in long-lasting fronds, and retaining its leaves without any succession of foliage. The Greeks call it the phoenix (i.e. ??o±vt() because it lasts for a long time, after the name of that bird of Arabia that is thought to live for many years. Although it grows in many places, its fruit does not ripen in them all, but it often does in Egypt and Syria. Its fruits are called 'dates' (dactylus; cf. 6?mtU2oç, "finger") from their sim- ilarity to fingers. The names of the dates vary: some are called palmulae, similar to the ben-nut (myrobalanus); some Theban, which are also called Nicolaian; some nucales, which the Greeks call mapUYta(c) (cf. mapUYtòç, "date-palm").
2. Laurel (laurus) is so called from the word 'praise' (laus, gen. laudis), because with it the heads of con- querors were crowned with praises. Among the ancients, moreover, it was named laudea; afterwards, with the let- ter d removed and r substituted it was called laurus - just like auricula ("ear"), which originally was pronounced audicula, and medidies, which is now pronounced meri- dies ("midday"). The Greeks call this tree 6???v?, because it never loses its verdure; for this reason conquerors are aptly crowned with it. It is commonly believed that only this tree is never struck by lightning.
3. The apple-tree (malum) is so called by the Greeks because its fruit is the roundest of all fruits (cf. µ?2ov,
"apple, any fleshy tree-fruit," hence "round thing"); whence also those are true apples that are strikingly round. Matian apples (i.e. the apple proper) are named for the place from which they were first brought, for many trees have taken their names from the provinces or cities from which they were brought. Vergil shows lovers what is customarily sought with an apple. 4. The quince (malum Cydonium) takes its name from a town on the island of Crete - in this regard, the Greeks would call Cydonia the mother of the Cretan cities - and from this fruit cydonitum (i.e. a preserve or medicinal oint- ment of quince) is made. From it also is made a wine that deceives the appetite of those who are enfeebled, for in appearance, taste, and smell it presents the sensation of any kind of old wine.
5. The malomellum type of apple is so named for its sweetness, because its fruit has the taste of honey (mel), or because it is preserved in honey, whence a certain poet says (Martial, Epigrams 13.24):
If quinces steeped in Cecropian honey are placed before you, you would say, "I like these honey-apples (melimelum)!"
6. The pomegranate (malum Punicum) is so called because that species was brought from the Punic region. It also has the name malogranatum, because it contains a great multitude of seeds (granus) within the sphere of its rind. The tree-name malusgranata is of feminine gender, but its fruit is of neuter gender. The flower of this tree is called máttvoç by the Greeks; Latin speakers call it cadu- cum. But the Greeks call the flower of wild pomegranates ßa2aáottov. Some of these are white, some purple, and some pink, like pomegranate flowers. Physicians say that our bodies are not nourished by eating pomegranates, but they consider them better for medicinal use than for eating.
7. The peach (malum Persicum), which is granted a very brief life, is said to have three types: hard-fruited, Armenian, and Persian. The hard-fruited (duracenus) is so named because its fruit has a 'sour taste' (acor;
cf. durus, "harsh"). The Armenian peach (Armeniacus) is so called because that type was first brought over from Armenia. The Persian peach (Persicus) is so called because Perseus - from whom the Ptolemies claimed that they sprang - first planted that tree in Egypt. In Per- sia this tree produced a deadly fruit, but in our region the fruit is pleasant and sweet. One kind of peach tree is called 'early' (praecox, perhaps the apricot), another 'summer.'
8. The 'citron tree' (Medica arbor), whose name became famous in the Mantuan's (i.e. Vergil's) poems, was first brought from Media, whence it took its name. The Greeks call it m?6póµ?2ov, and Latin speakers citria (cf. citrea, "citrus-tree") because its fruit and leaves bring to mind the smell of cedar (cedrus). Its fruit is an anti- dote for poison, and it is this property that the same poet wishes to be understood when he tells us that the life's breath is nourished by it (Vergil, Geo. 2.126-35). This tree is laden with fruit in almost every season; some of it is ripe, some unripe, some still only in flower - which is a rare thing in other trees.
9. The mella, which the Greeks call lotos (i.e. 2Ytóç), is commonly called the 'Syrian fava bean' (faba Syrica) because of its shape and color. It is a large tree, bearing an edible fruit, larger than a pepper, with a sweet taste, whence it is called mella. 10. The plum tree (coccymela), which Latin speakers call prunus for its color (cf. pruna, "red-hot coal"), others call nixa from the multitude of fruit 'produced' (eniti, ppl. enixus) by it. The best of this type is the Damascene (i.e. damson) plum, named for the city of Damascus from which it was first imported. The fruit of this species alone is known to be curative for the stomach, for the others are held to be noxious. Only this tree drips with a glutinous and thick gum, which both physicians and scribes use.
11. The oleomela tree grows in Palmyra, a city in Syria, so called because from its trunk an oil (oleum) flows as thick as honey, with a sweet taste. 12. The pomelida is similar to serviceberry, a middle-sized tree with a white flower, so called because the sweetness of its fruit is mixed with a sharp taste. This tree lives for a short while. 13. The melopos tree of Africa was named in the Punic language; from it flows a sticky sap named Hammonian after its region (i.e. a region in Libya). 14. The medlar (mespila) tree is thorny, with fruit like apples but a little smaller, and so called because its fruit has the shape of a 'little ball' (pilula).
15. The pear (pirus) seems to be called that because its fruit is oddly shaped in the likeness of fire (cf. pup, "fire"), for this kind of fruit is wide at the base and nar- rows at the top, like a tongue of fire. The tree is pirus, but the fruit is pira. There are many species of pears, of which Crustumian are partly red, named for the town Crustu- mium. Pears are said to be extremely burdensome when carried by pack-animals, even if there are only a few. 16. The cherry (cerasus) is named from the city Cerasum in Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea), for when Lucullus destroyed the Pontic city Cerasum he imported this kind of fruit from there and named it cerasium from the city's name. Thetreeiscalled cerasus, thefruit cerasium. Before Lucul- lus these were in Italy, but only a hard variety, and hence it was also called the cornel-cherry (cornus; cf. cornu, "(hard) horn"). The wood of the tree is good for spears; hence Vergil (Geo. 2.448):
The cornel-cherry (cornus) good for war.
17. The fig (ficus) is so-named in Latin for its fecun- dity (fecunditas), for it is more fruitful than the other trees. It produces fruit three and four times in a sin- gle year, and while one crop ripens another begins to grow. Likewise the carica (i.e. a dry fig) is also named from its abundance. The Egyptian fig is said to be more fecund. When wood from it is placed in water it imme- diately sinks, and after it has lain for some time in the mud it rises to the surface, contrary to what is natural - when soaked it ought to stay down with the weight of the moisture. Formerly athletes would be fed figs, before the trainer Pythagoras switched them to the use of meat, which is a more substantial food. It is said that figs, eaten by the elderly fairly often in their diet, smooth away their wrinkles. They also say that very ferocious bulls, tethered to a fig tree, suddenly become tame.
18. The wild fig (caprificus) is so called because it tears at (carpere; cf. also mappóç, "fruit") the walls in which it grows up, for it bursts forth and grows out from the hidden spots in which it is germinated. Others think this tree is called caprificus because with its assistance the fig (ficus) tree is made fruitful. 19. The mulberry tree (morus, also meaning "blackberry") is so named by the Greeks (i.e. µópov, "mulberry, blackberry"), and Latin speakers call it the rubus (lit. "blackberry bush") because its fruit or foliage is red (rubere). There is also a woodland mulberry (mora), bearing fruit that relieves the hunger and need of shepherds in the wilderness.
It is said that its leaves, when thrown onto a serpent, destroy it.
20. The 'sycamore fig' (sycomorus), along with the mulberry (morus), have Greek names (i.e. oUmóµopUç, µópov). It is called sycomorus (cf. oumov, "fig") because its leaves are like the morus. Latin speakers call this the 'lofty' (celsus) fig because of its height, for it is not short like the mulberry. 21. The walnut (nux) is so called because its shade or drippings from its leaves harm (nocere) neighboring trees. Latin speakers call it by another name, iuglans, as if it were 'Jupiter's nut' (Iovis glans), for this tree was consecrated to Jupiter. Its fruit has so much virtue that, when it is mingled with sus- picious food containing herbs or mushrooms, it drives out, seizes, and destroys whatever is poisonous in it.
22. All fruits covered with a rather hard shell are gener- ically called 'nuts' (nux), as pine nuts (pinea), filberts, acorns (glans), chestnuts, almonds. The kernel (nucleus) is also named from nux, because it is covered with a hard shell. On the other hand every soft fruit is called malum, but this term is modified by the names of the regions in which they originated, as Persian, Punic, Matian, Cydonian, and so forth.
23. Almond (amygdala) is a Greek name (i.e.
?µUy6?2?), which in Latin is called 'long nut.' Others call it nucicla, as if it were "the little nut." Concerning it, Vergil (Geo. 1.187):
When many a nut tree (nux) in the woods clothes itself in flowers.
For among all the trees it first clothes itself in flower, and bears fruit before the other trees. 24. Filberts (abellana) are given their name from Abella, a town in Campa- nia, where they are abundant. These are called Pontic nuts by the Greeks, because they are abundant around the Pontic (i.e. Black) Sea. 25. Latin speakers name the chestnut (castanea) from a Greek term, for the Greeks call it maot?vta, because its paired fruits are hidden in a small sack like testicles, and when they are ejected from it, it is as if they were castrated (castrare). As soon as this tree is cut down, it commonly sprouts again like a forest.
26. The 'holm oak' (ilex) is so called from 'chosen' (eligere, ppl. electus), for people first chose the fruit of this tree for their sustenance. Whence also the poet (unidentified):
The first mortals belched the acorn from their throats.
For before there was any use of grain, ancient people lived on acorns. 27. The cork tree (suberies) has bark that peo- ple harvest; it is very useful because it floats. It is called suberies because pigs eat its fruit. That fruit is nourishing for swine, not humans, and it is called suberies as if the term were subedies (cf. sus, "pig"; edere, "eat"). 28. The beech tree and the esculus (i.e. another type of oak tree) are nut-bearing trees thought to be so named because people once sustained themselves from their fruit, eat- ing it for food and taking it as nourishment. Thus esculus is named for food (esca), but the beech (fagus) derives its name from Greek, as ??ay?±v in Greek means "to eat."
29. Xyliglycon, which Latin speakers incorrectly call the 'carob tree' (siliqua), took its name from the Greeks, because the fruit of this tree is sweet; (á2ov indeed means "wood," and y2Umá means "a sweet thing." The juice pressed from the fruit of this tree is called acacia (gum Arabic; cf. ?mam(c)a, "shittah tree") by the Greeks. 30. Pis- tachio (pistacia) is so called because the shell of its fruit emits an odor of pure (pisticus) spikenard. 
31. The pine (pinus), a resinous tree, is named from the sharpness of its needles, for the ancients would call a sharp thing pinnum. The Greeks call one type of pine p(c)tUç, another p?ám?, which we call resinous (piceus) because it exudes pitch (pix). These also differ in appear- ance. Moreover, on the islands of Germania the 'tears' of this tree produce amber (electrum), for the flowing sap hardens, from cold or warmth, into solidity and makes a gem taking its name from its character, namely amber (sucinum), because it consists of the sap (sucus) of the tree. The pine tree is believed to be good for everything that grows under it, just as the fig is harmful to all.
32. The fir (abies) is so called because it goes (ire; cf. abire, "go away") further than the other trees and towers aloft. It is naturally lacking in the earthy humor,
and accordingly is considered easily handled and light. About it, Vergil (cf. Geo. 2.68):
And (the fir, abies) that will see disasters at sea;
for ships are made of fir. Some call fir Gallicus for its whiteness (cf. y?2a, "milk"). Further, fir has no knots.
33. Cedar (cedrus) is called by the Greeks ms6poç, as if it were matoµsv?ç 6pUòç úypóv (i.e. cedrus from mat- + 6pUoç), that is, "moisture of the burning tree." Its leaves bear a resemblance to those of the cypress. It is a tree of very pleasant odor and long-lasting, and it is never harmed by worms. About it, Persius (Satires 1.42):
And having said things worthy of cedar (cedrus);
that is, because of its lasting perpetuity. The paneled ceilings of temples are also made from this wood because of its durability. The resin of cedar is called cedar-oil (cedria), which is so useful for preserving books that once they are smeared with it they are not damaged by worms, nor do they grow old with time. Cedars grow in Crete, Africa, and Syria.
34. The cypress (cyparissus) is so named in Greek (i.e. mUp?ptoooç) because its head (caput) rises from a spher- ical shape into a point. Whence it is also called m?voç ("pine cone, pine tree, cone"), that is, "lofty rotundity." Hence its fruit is a 'cone' (conus), because in its rotundity it imitates a conic shape. Thus they are also called (Vergil, Aen. 3.680) "coniferous cypresses (coniferae cyparissi)." The wood of cypress is closest in character to cedar - it also is suitable for the timbers of temples; its impenetra- ble solidity never gives way under a burden, but it retains its initial strength. The ancients used to pile cypress branches near their funeral pyres so that the pleasant quality of the cypress scent would mask the odor of the corpses when they were burned.
35. The juniper (iuniperus) is so called in Greek either because it peaks into a narrow tip from a wide base, like fire, or because once kindled it stays on fire a long time - so muchso that if a live coalof its woodwere to be covered with ash it would last up to a year. In Greek, pup means "fire." Further, one kind of juniper is small, and the other large. 36. The ebony tree (ebenus) grows in India and Ethiopia. When cut it hardens into stone. Its wood is black and its bark smooth, like laurel. The Indian type is spotted with little white and tawny markings, but the Ethiopian, which is considered superior, is not spotted at all but is black, smooth, and hard as horn. In India
lies the Mareotian marsh, whence ebony comes. Lucan (Civil War 10.117) speaks of
Mareotic ebony (ebenus).
Ebony is tied onto rattles so that the sight of black things will not frighten an infant.
37. The plane tree (platanus) is so called from the breadth of its leaves, or because the tree itself spreads wide (patulus) and is large, for Greeks call a broad thing p2atáç. Scripture refers to the name and shape of this tree, saying (cf. Ecclesiasticus 24:19): "As a plane tree (platanus) in the streets (platea) I was spread out." Fur- ther, its leaves are very tender and soft, and like those of vines. 38. The quercus, or quernus ("oak tree"), is so called because the pagan gods would use it to make poetic pre- dictions for those seeking (quaerere) their responses. It is a very long-lived tree - as one reads concerning the oak of Mambre, under which Abraham dwelt, which is said to have lasted for many centuries, up to the reign of the emperor Constans. Its fruit is called the gallnut (galla). A wild type of gallnut is called òµ??am(c)t?ç; it is of small size, but with a firm and knotty body, which is used for medicines and purple inks. Another type is ß?2avoç; it is mild and smooth and very porous, used only for lamps.
39. The ash (fraxinus) is said to be so called because it prefers to grow in harsh places and mountainous breaks (fragum). Fraxinus is derived from fragum, as montanus from mons. About it, Ovid (Met. 10.93):
And the ash, good for spears.
40. The yew (taxus) is a poisonous tree, and from it the poison toxicum (cf. tó(ov, "bow") is pressed out. The Parthians and other nations make bows from yew, whence the poet (Vergil, Geo. 2.448):
Yews are bent into Iturean bows.
So he calls the Parthians 'Itureans.'
41. The maple (acer) is unequaled for its colors (cf. Ovid, Met. 10.95). Hardwood (robur) generally means whatever is very tough of any wood. 42. The alder (alnus) is so called because it is 'nourished by a river' (alatur amne), for it grows very close to water, and survives away from water with difficulty. Because it is nourished in a damp place it is tender and soft. 43. The elm (ulmus) takes this name because it does better in swampy (uligi- nosus) and damp (humidus) places, for it is less luxuriant
in mountainous and harsh places. 44. The larch (larex, i.e. larix) was given this name from the fort Laricinum. Boards made from it, attached to tiles, repel fire, and do not char when burned.
45. The poplar (populus) is so called because a mul- titude grows from the base of its trunk. There are two kinds of poplar, one white, one black. The white poplar is so called because its leaves are white on one side and green on the other. Hence this type is bicolored, having as it were the marks of night and day, the periods estab- lished by sunrise and sunset. It also produces resin when it grows by the river Po or, as others record, in the terri- tory of Syria. 46. They say the linden (tilium) is so named because it is suitable to use for spears (telum) because of its smoothness and lightness for throwing, for it is a type of the lightest wood. 47. The willow (salix) is so called because it swiftly 'springs up' (salire), that is, quickly grows: a pliant tree, suitable for binding grapevines. They say that its seed has this property, that if anyone should consume it in a drink, he will not have children, and it also makes women infertile. The poplar, willow, and linden are all soft woods and good for carving.
48. The osier (vimen) is so called because it has great intensity (vis, accusative vim) of greenness. Its nature is such that, even when it has dried up, as soon as it is watered it becomes green, and then when it is cut and fixed in the ground it puts down roots on its own. 49. The tamarisk (myrice), which Latin speakers call tamaricus, is named for its bitterness (amaritudo), for its taste is very bitter. This tree grows in desolate places in stony soil. From this tree µ(c)o?9pov, that is "hatred" (actually "a hate-charm"), is said to be stirred up by witchcraft. 50. Myrtle (myrtus) is named from 'sea' (mare), because it is by preference a shore tree. Whence Vergil (Geo. 2.112):
Shores are happiest with myrtle (myrtetum),
and (Geo. 4.124)
Shore-loving myrtles (myrta).
Hence it is also called µUp(c)v? (i.e. µUpp(c)v?) by the Greeks. Moreover medical texts prescribe this tree as good for many female complaints.
51. The mastic (lentiscus) is so called because its spike is pliant (lentus) and soft, since we call whatever is flexible
lentus - whence osiers and vines are also lentus. Vergil (cf. Geo. 4.558, Ecl. 3.38):
And the supple (lentus) vines,
for 'flexible.' Mastic's fruit exudes oil, and its bark a resin that is called mastix. It grows abundantly on the island of Chios and is of better quality there. 52. The turpen- tine tree (terebinthus), its name Greek (i.e. t?psµtv9oç, t?psßtv9oç), produces a resin excellent beyond all resins.
53. The box tree (buxum) has a Greek name partly cor- rupted in Latin, for in Greek it is called pá(oç. It is an evergreen tree and useful for receiving the shapes of let- ters because of the smoothness of its wood. Whence also Scripture (cf. Isaiah 30:8): "Write upon box (buxum)."
54. The oleander (rhododendron), which commonly and incorrectly is called lorandrum because its leaves are like laurel (laurus), has a flower like a rose (cf. pó6ov, "rose"). It is a poisonous tree, for it kills animals and heals snakebites. 55. Shepherds call one tree herbitum because they give it to livestock in place of grass where pasturage is lacking.
56. Turbiscus (perhaps 9Uµ?2a(c)a, "spurge-flax") is so named because from one clump of it many shoots rise, as if it were a 'crowd' (turba). Straw (stipa) is so named because roofs are thatched (stipare) with it. Its diminutive form is stipula. 57. The reed (arundo) is so called because it quickly dries up (arescere). The ancients called it 'cane' (canna); afterwards Varro called it arundo. It should be understood that the Latin canna derives from Hebrew: in Hebrew canna means "reed" (cala- mus). Cicuta is the part between the nodes of cane, so called because it is concealed. 58. It is said that in Indian marshes grow reeds and canes from whose roots is pressed a very sweet juice that people drink. Hence Varro (i.e. Varro Atacinus, not Marcus Terentius Varro) says (fr. 20):
The Indian reed does not grow into a great tree; its sap is squeezed from its supple roots, and no sweet honey can vie with its juice.
59. The elder (sabucus) is a soft and porous tree. The
rhamnus is a kind of bramble-bush that commonly is
called bear-briar (sentix ursina), a very rough and thorny bush. 60. The briar-bush (sentix) is named from 'waste- land' (situs), which is uncultivated land in which briars and thorns grow. Our ancestors would call every prickly tree a thornbush (vepris), because it 'clings forcefully' (vi prendere).
61. The wild olive (oleaster) is so called because it has leaves like the olive's (oliva; cf. the pejorative suffix
-aster) but broader. It is an uncultivated and wild tree, bitter and unfruitful. A branch of olive grafted on a wild olive changes the potency of its root and converts the tree into its proper character as an olive. The sap of the wild olive is of two kinds. One is like gum without any biting quality, the other is ammoniac pitch collected from the drippings, and is biting. 62. The olive (oliva) in Greek is called s2atov ("olive oil"; cf. s2ata, "olive-tree, olive"), whence it has been taken into Latin as oliva. But the tree itself is olea, the fruit oliva, and the oil oleum. The tree is a symbol of peace, and its fruits are called by diverse names. 63. The orchas olive has a Greek etymology, and is so called from its likeness to a testicle, which the Greeks call opytç. 64. The radiola olive is so named because it is elongated like a ray (radius). The Paphian olive is named for the island of Paphos from which it was first imported.
65. The lycinia olive, because its oil gives the best light, for 2Uyv(c)ç means "light" (cf. 2áyvoç, "lamp"). From this the word 'firewood' (lignum) also receives its name, because it is good for burning and light.
66. The pausia olive, which country people incorrectly call pusia (i.e. posia), is good for its sweet and green oil. It is called pausia because it is 'pounded down' (pavire), that is, crushed - from this word also comes 'pavement' (pavimentum). 67. The Syrian olive is so called because it was brought over from Syria, or because it is dark- skinned. The crustumia olive is also called the volemis, so called because it fills the palm (vola), that is, the mid- dle of the hand, with its large size; from this root we also have the word 'seize' (involare). However, some under- stand the word volemus to mean "good" and "large" in the Gallic language. Pickled olives (colymbas) are so called . . .
68. 'Olive oil' (oleum) is named from the olive tree (olea), for as I have already said, olea is the tree, from which is derived the word oleum. But what is pressed from white olives is called 'Spanish oil,' and òµ???mtov in Greek. What is pressed from tawny, immature olives is called 'green oil,' but what comes from overly mature
olives is called 'common.' Of these, the one primarily used for human consumption is the Spanish, second the green, third the common. 69. The amurca of olive oil is the watery part, so called from 'emerging' (emergere), that is, because it sinks (mergere) below the oil, and it is the oil's dregs. The Greeks call this ?µópy?, borrowing the word from Latin.
70. Gum (gummi) is a Greek term; they call it móµµt. 71. The Greeks call resin (resina) p?t(c)v?, for p?±v ("flow") in Greek means whatever flows. It is the 'tears' given off from the 'sweat' of wood from such trees as cherry, mastic, balsam, or other trees or bushes that are said to 'sweat,' like the odoriferous woods of the orient, such as the sap of balsam and of fennel or of amber, whose 'tears' harden into a gem. The chief resin is turpentine (terebinthina), the best of all; it is imported from Arabia Petraea, Judea, and Syria, from Cyprus and Africa, and from the Cycladean islands. Second best is the resin of the mastic tree, which is called mastix; this is imported from the island of Chios. Third pine resin, of which one is pttU(c)v?, the other p?ámtvoç, the one liquid, the other dry. These are imported from Tyrrhenian Colopho- nia, whence it has taken the name Colophonian resin.
72. Pitch (pix) is a Greek word, which they call p(c)ooa. Others would have it that pitch is named from 'pine' (pinus). It is called m2Yv(c)a (cf. m2Ûv, "twig") by the Greeks; we can call it ramalis (lit. "branch-like"). The preferred type of this is clear, smooth, and clean.
73. There are three methods of natural creation of trees: either they grow spontaneously, or they spring from seeds that happen to be lying on the ground, or they sprout from roots. Human skill came upon the other methods with the aid of nature. 74. All fruits in Latin are as a rule of feminine gender, with a few exceptions, such as the masculine oleaster ("wild olive") and neuter siler ("osier"); so Vergil (Geo. 2.12):
The soft osier (Molle siler).
Likewise buxum ("box tree") is neuter, although it may also be treated as feminine. Some would make a super- fluous distinction, so that we would speak of the box tree in the feminine, but of boxwood in the neuter.
viii. Aromatic trees (De aromaticis arboribus) 1. Spices are whatever India or Arabia or other regions pro- duce that have a fragrant scent. They seem to have gotten the name 'spice' (aroma) either because they are proper
for putting on altars (ara) for invocations to the gods, or because they are known to blend and mingle them- selves with air (aer). Indeed, what is scent if not air that has been tinctured by something? 2. Frankincense (tus) is a huge and well-branched tree of Arabia, with very smooth bark and branches like the maple's, dripping a white, aromatic sap, like an almond tree, that is turned into a powder by chewing. When it is broken it is oily on the inside, and when set on fire it burns easily. Also we call it masculum because it is spherical in its nature like testicles (cf. masculus, "male"). Another type is flat and almost scaly, of lesser quality. It may be adulterated, mixed with resin or gum, but it can be distinguished by its properties, for frankincense, set on fire, burns, while resin fumes, but gum liquefies when heated. 3. Frankin- cense (tus) is so called from 'crushing' (tundere). It is also called libanum after the mountain of Arabia where the Sabaeans dwell, for their mountain, where frankincense is gathered, is called Libanus.
4. Myrrh (myrra) is a tree of Arabia, five cubits high, and is like the thorn that they call ?mav9oç ("acanthus"). Its sap is green and bitter (amarus), whence it takes the name myrra. The sap that flows spontaneously is more precious, while that drawn out by slashing the bark is considered poorer. From myrrh's prunings the Arabs feed their fires, and unless they counteract it with the odor of storax, they contract many incurable diseases from its highly noxious smoke. Troglodyte myrrh is so called from an Arabian island where a better and purer form is gathered. 5. The storax (storax) is a tree of Ara- bia, similar to the quince, whose shoots exude sap from their crevices during the rising of the dog star. When its distillate falls to the ground it is unclean, but when it is preserved in its own bark, it is clean. The distillate clinging to rods and reeds is clean and whitish, but then becomes yellowed because of the sun. The storax itself is reedy, oily, resinous, of pleasant odor, and moist, and it emits a sort of honey-like liquid. Moreover, storax is so called because the sap of this tree flows and is solidified, for the Greeks call a drop of sap an 'icicle' (stiria). In Greek the tree is called otápa(, in Latin, storax.
6. Bdellium is a tree of India and Arabia, and the sap of the Arabic type is better. It is clear, whitish, smooth, oily,
uniformly waxy, easily softened, unmixed with wood or soil, bitter, good-smelling. The kind from India is dirty, black, and comes in larger lumps. It is adulterated with gum mixed in, which makes its taste not so bitter. 7. Mas- tix is the sap of the mastic tree (lentiscus). It is also called granomastix because it looks like grains (granum). The better kind grows on the island of Chios, and is good- smelling, with the whiteness of Punic wax - hence it beautifies the glow of one's skin. Sometimes it is adul- terated with resin or frankincense.
8. The pepper tree (piper) grows in India, on the side of the Caucasian range that faces the sun. Its leaves are like the juniper's. Serpents protect the pepper groves, but the inhabitants of that region, when the peppers ripen, burn them, and the serpents are put to flight by the fire - and from this flame the pepper, which is naturally white, is made black. In fact there are several kinds of pepper fruits. The unripe kind is called 'long pepper'; that unaffected by fire, 'white pepper'; but that which has a wrinkled and bristly skin takes both its color (i.e. 'black') and its name (cf. pup, "fire") from the heat of the fire. If a pepper is light in weight it is old; if heavy, it is fresh. But the fraud of the merchants should be guarded against, for they are wont to sprinkle litharge or lead over very old, moistened pepper to make it heavy. 9. The aloa (i.e. 'aloes,' Aquilaria agallocha, not 'aloe,' Aloe vera; cf. section 28 below) grows in India and Arabia, a tree of very sweet and noble scent. Indeed, its wood is heaped on altars (altare) in place of incense, whence it is believed to have derived its name.
10. Cinnamon (cinnamomum) is so called because its bark is round and slender 'in the manner of a reed's' (in cannae modum). It grows in Indian and Ethiopian lands, and it is a short shrub, only two cubits tall. It is of nearly black or ashy color, and its shoots are very thin. Cinnamon that becomes thick is looked down on, but that which grows fairly thin is choice. When it is broken it emits a visible puff resembling a cloud or dust.
11. Amomum is so called because it produces an odor like that of cinnamon. It grows in Syria and Armenia as a shrub producing seeds in clusters like grapes, with a white flower that looks like a violet's, leaves like bryony, and a good scent; it induces sweet sleep.
12. 
'Cassia cinnamon' (casia) grows in Arabia; its stalk has tough bark, and it has purple leaves like pepper. It has a similar character to cinnamon, but less potency, so a double weight of it is mixed into medicines in place of cinnamon. 13. The 'aromatic calamus' is named for its resemblance to the common reed (calamus). Grown in India, it is jointed with many nodes, of tan color, and fragrant with a sweetness of aroma. When it is broken it fractures into many pieces, resembling casia in taste with a slightly biting sharpness.
14. The balsam tree (balsamum) existed in Judea within a space of only about sixteen acres. Afterwards, when the Romans took control over that region, it was planted over the widespread hills. Its trunk is like that of a vine, its leaves like those of rue, but whiter and peren- nial. The tree is called balsam, but its wood is called xylobalsamum, its fruit or seed carpobalsamum, its sap opobalsamum. This last prefix lends its meaning because when it is struck with iron claws the bark of the wood exudes a sap of excellent scent through its cavities - for in Greek a cavity is called òp?. People adulterate its sap with oil of the henna tree or honey mixed in, but it can be proved to be unmixed with honey if it coagulates with milk, and unmixed with oil if, when instilled or mixed in with water, it easily dissolves, and further if woolen clothing soiled with it is not stained. But adulterated bal- sam does not coagulate with milk, and like oil it floats on top of water and stains clothing. When balsam is pure it has so much strength that if the sun heats it up, it cannot be held in one's hand.
ix. Aromatic or common plants (De herbis aromaticis sive communibus) 1. The names of certain plants echo their own originating principles and contain the expla- nation of their naming. Still, you will not discover the etymology of every plant, for their names change with their locale. 2. Folium is so called because floating with- out any (ullus) root it is gathered on the Indian littoral. The Indians pierce it with thread, then dry and store it. It is said to be the herb of Paradise, resembling spikenard in its taste. 3. Spikenard (nardus) is a prickly herb, whence it is called vap6óotayUç by the Greeks (cf. ot?yUç, "spike (of grain)"). One type is called Indian, another Syrian - not because it grows in Syria but because the moun- tain on which it is found faces India on one side and Syria on the other. The Indian takes many forms, but the Syrian is better: light in weight, golden, hairy, small
of ear, very fragrant, resembling galingale. If it stays long in one's mouth it dries out the tongue. Celtic spikenard takes its name from a territory in Gaul, yet it grows more abundantly in the Ligurian Alps as well as in Syria; it is a small bush whose roots are gathered into hand- fuls with cords. Its flower is only good for its scent; its stalks and little roots are considered good for human uses.
4. Costum is the root of an herb growing in India, Arabia, and Syria, but the best is Arabian. It is white and light in weight, sweet, of pleasant scent; the Indian type is black and light like a hollow stalk, whereas the Syrian is heavy, colored like boxwood, bitter in odor - but the best is white, light in weight, dry, and fiery in taste. 5. The 'saffron crocus' (crocum) is named from the Cilician town called Corycium, although it also is found in other places, but not as much or of such qual- ity as in Cilicia - whence it takes its name from the more important region. Indeed, many things have taken their names from places where they are more prevalent or are better in some way. The best saffron is that which is fresh, good-smelling, not pale, of extended length, whole and not crumbled into pieces, good to breathe, and when it is grasped staining one's hands, and sting- ing slightly. If it is not found in this condition you may know that it is old or diluted. It is adulterated by mix- ing with the dregs of saffron oil. Also in order to aug- ment saffron's weight ground-up litharge is added. These things are revealed if the saffron is found to be cov- ered with dust and if, when boiled down, it has lost its proper scent. 6. Crocomagma ('saffron dregs'; cf. magma, "dregs of an unguent") is made when aromatic fluids are pressed out from saffron (crocinus) ointment and the sediment is shaped into little cakes, and therefore it is so called.
7. Hazelwort (asarum) grows on shady mountains, with flowers like those of casia (see viii.12 above). They have a purple flower next to the root, in which a seed like a grape-seed is contained. It has many very slender and good-smelling roots, and its character is like nard's. Valerian (phu) grows along the Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea), with leaves like wild olive. 8. Galingale (cyperum) is so called by the Greeks because of its hot quality (cf. pup, "fire"). Its root is like that of a triangular rush, its leaves like a leek's, its roots black or close to the color of olive roots, and it is very odoriferous and sharp. It grows in swamps and empty places. There is said to be
another species of galingale that grows in India and is called zinziber ("ginger") in their language.
9. The Illyrian iris (iris) took its name from its like- ness to the heavenly Iris (i.e. the rainbow). For this reason Latin speakers call it arcumen, because its flower, in its variety of color, imitates that heavenly bow (arcus). It is called Illyrian because it is most abundant and fragrant in Illyria. In appearance it has leaves like the gladiolus, and it has an aromatic root that is good-smelling. 10. Aco- rum (perhaps 'sweet flag') has leaves similar to the iris, and roots of a very sharp but pleasant scent, for which reason it is also a spice. Meu . . . Cardamom (Cardamo- mum).  11. The squinum (i.e. schoenum,a kind of rush)
that grows at the Euphrates is better than that in Ara- bia, tan-colored, abounding in flowers, purple, slender; it smells like a rose when it is crumbled in one's hands, and when tasted it is fiery and biting on the tongue. Its flower is called oyo(c)voU ?v9oç ("flower of rush"), for 'flower' is ?v9oç in Greek (cf. oyo±voç, "rush"). 12. Thyme (thymum) is so called because its flower gives off a fragrance (cf. 9á?tv, "offer by burning"; 9Uµt?v "to burn incense"). About this, Vergil (Geo. 4.169):
The fragrant honey smells of thyme (thymum).
13. Epithymum (i.e. a parasitic plant growing on thyme) is a Greek name, which in Latin is called 'flower of the thyme' (flos thymi), for the thyme flower in Greek is 9áµov (and cf. sp(c), "upon"). It is a flower resembling 'Cretan thyme' (thymbra).
14. Marjoram (sampsuchus), which Latin speakers call amaracus, a name that Vergil uses to refer to Venus (cf. Aen. 1.693):
Where the soft marjoram (amaracus), embraces him with shade.
This herb is good for perfumes. It took its name from the page of a certain king who, having accidentally fallen when he was carrying perfumes, created a new and very pleasant scent from their mixing together. 15. Hyacinth (hyacinthus) is a plant that has a purple flower. It took its name from a certain noble boy who was found killed in a glade among purple flowers; the misfortune of this child's death gave its name to the plant. Inroot and flower it resembles an onion, and it delays puberty in boys.
16. The plant narcissus (narcissus) has a name given in the myth of a certain boy whose limbs were transformed into this flower. The flower both keeps Narcissus's name
for its own and retains the glory of his beauty in the splendor of its petals.
17. The rose (rosa) is so called from the appearance of its flower, which blushes (rubere) with a red (ruti- lans) color. 18. The lily (lilia) is a plant with a milk-white (lacteus) flower, whence it is named, as if it were liclia. Although its petals are white, a glitter of gold appears within it. 19. The violet (viola) gets its name from the strength (vis) of its scent (cf. olere, "be fragrant"). There are three kinds of violet: purple, white, and quince- yellow. 20. Acanthus (acanthus) is an evergreen Egyptian plant, full of thorns and with supple shoots. 21. Cloth- ing artfully decorated with an acanthus pattern is called acanthinus. It is also called acanthis.
22. Ivy (hedera) is so called because with its creeping it clings (adhaerere) to trees. About it, Vergil (Ecl. 8.13):
To twine the ivy (hedera) (about your temples) among the victorious laurels.
Others say ivy is so called because the ancients would offer it, in addition to a good deal of milk, as food for kids (haedus). 23. Ivy is naturally a sign of cold land. It is an antidote to drunkenness if someone who is drunk is crowned with ivy. 24. They record that much hellebore (elleborum) grows in Greece near the river Elleborum, and thence it is so called by the Greeks. The Romans call it by another name, veratrum, because when eaten it brings a disturbed mind back to health. There are two kinds of hellebore, white and black. 25. Acone is a harbor in Bithynia that is so famous for its crop of harmful herbs that we call noxious herbs 'aconite' (aconitum) from its name. The poison called toxicus takes its name because it is pressed from yew (taxeus) trees, especially in Cantabria.
26. Spurge (euphorbium) is so called because its juice sharpens the vision of one's eyes. It is so powerful that it makes tough meat cook more quickly. It grows in many places, but mostly in Mauritania. 27. The plant laser (in classical Latin, "asafoetida") grows on the moun- tain Oscobagum where the river Ganges rises. Its juice was first called lacsir because it flows like milk (lac), and then it was named laser in derivative usage. It is called
Cyrenian opium (opium) by some because it grows in Cyrene. 28. Aloe (aloe) is an herb of very bitter juice. Panaces (cf. pavam?ç, "all-heal, Ferulago galbanifera") is a plant of fragrant smell; it has a stem like the giant fennel from which flows the juice called opopanax. It is yellow and oily, with a heavy and very bitter smell. Galbanum (galbanum) . . . 
29. Dicte (Dicta) is a mountain in Crete from which the plant dittany (dictamnum) took its name. For its sake, in Vergil (Aen. 4.73), a wounded doe scours the Dictaean groves, for it is of such potency that it drives iron from one's body, and rids it of arrows, whence wild beasts, hit by arrows, cast them from their bodies by feeding on it. Some Latin speakers call it 'pennyroyal of Mars' (puleium Martis) because it shakes off the missiles of war. 30. Mandrake (mandragora) is so called because it has a sweet-smelling fruit the size of a Matian apple; hence Latin speakers call it 'apple of the earth.' Poets name it ?v9pYpóµop??oç ("human-formed"), because it has a root that resembles the human form. Its bark, mixed with wine, is given for drinking to those whose bodies need to undergo surgery, so that they are sedated and feel no pain. There are two kinds of mandrake: the female, with leaves like lettuce's, producing fruit similar to plums, and the male, with leaves like the beet's.
31. The poppy (papavera) is a sleep-inducing herb, about which Vergil (Geo. 1.78):
The poppy (papaver) suffused with Lethean sleep -
for it brings sleep to sick people. One type of poppy is cultivated, the other wild, from which flows the juice called opium (opion). 32. The colocynth (colocynthis) is a wild cucumber that is ferociously bitter. It stretches its vines over the earth as the cucumber plant does. It is called 'colocynth' because it has a spherical fruit (cf. mo2omáv9?, "round gourd"), and leaves like the common cucumber's. 33. The Greeks name the 'centaury' (centau- rea) thus (i.e. m?vtaáp?tov) because it is reported to have been discovered by the centaur Chiron. It is also called 2tµv?otoç because it grows in moist places (cf. 2(c)µv?, "marsh"). It is also called 'gall of the earth' because of its bitterness. 34. Licorice (glycyriza) is so called from the Greek because it has a sweet root, for y2Umáç in Greek means "sweet" (and cf. p(c)(a, "root"). The same plant is called ?6tyoç (cf. 6(c)ya, "thirst") because it allays thirst for thirsty people.
35. Dracontea (i.e. a plant resembling arum) is so called because its spike is varicolored like a snake, and it bears the likeness of a dragon (draco), or because a viper fears that plant. 36. The celandine (chelidonia) is so called either because it seems to sprout with the coming of swallows (cf. y?2t6Ûv, "swallow") or because if the eyes of young swallows are plucked out, their mothers are said to heal them with this herb. 37. The heliotrope (heliotropium) got its name at first because it flowers at the summer solstice, or because it revolves and turns its petals with the sun's movements (cf. ?2toç, "sun"; tpópoç, "turn"), whence it is called 'sun-follower' (solse- quia) by Latin speakers. It opens its flowers at sunrise and closes at sunset. Latin speakers also call one species of heliotrope 'wild chicory' (intubum silvaticum). This is also verrucaria, so called because it gets rid of warts (verruca) when its juice is drunk, or removes them when applied as a poultice.
38. Pentaphyllon is so called from the number of its petals (cf. psvt?, "five", ?á22ov "leaf, petal"), whence Latin speakers call it cinquefoil (quinquefolium, lit. "five- petal"). This plant is so clean that it was customarily employed by the pagans for purification in their temples.
39. Hyssop (hyssopum) is an herb good for purging the lungs. Whence in the Old Testament they would sprinkle anyone who wished to be ritually cleansed with lamb's blood on bunches of hyssop. It grows on crags, clinging to the rock by its roots. 40. Rhubarb (reubarbara), or reuponticum, takes these names because the former is gathered across the Danube on barbarian (barbaricus) soil, the latter is gathered around the Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea). It has further the prefix reu, because that is "root" (radix), as if the terms were radix barbara and radix Pontica.
41. The herb called henbane (hyoscyamos) by the Greeks is called the 'chalice-like' (calicularis) herb by Latin speakers, because its calyxes (caliculus) grow in the shape of goblets like those of pomegranates. Their edges are saw-toothed and they have seeds inside like the poppy's. This herb is also called insana because using it is dangerous; indeed if it is eaten or drunk it causes insanity or hallucinations. It is commonly called mili- mindrum because it induces aberration of mind (mens).
42. Saxifrage (saxifraga) is so called because its seeds crack and break up stones in the bladder (cf. saxum, "rock"; frangere, "break"). Gentian (gentiana) takes its
name, as physicians record, from its discoverer; its roots resemble those of birthwort (aristolochia). It grows at the foot of the Alps and in Asian Galatia.
Savory (satureia) is hot and almost aflame. People think its name was given it, because it inclines people to lust. 43. Satyrion is so called from satyrs (Satyrus) because of its incitement to lasciviousness; it is com- monly called stincus because it arouses lust. This is the same as the orchid (orchis), because its root is shaped like testicles, which the Greeks call opytç. It is also called 'hare-like' (leporinus) because it sends out a supple stalk.
44. The nettle (urtica) is so called because contact with it scorches (adurere) one's body, for it is of an entirely fiery nature and it inflames (perurere) at the touch, whence it also causes an itch (prurigo).
45. The herb wormwood (artemesia) was dedicated by the pagans to Diana, whence it was named, for in Greek Diana is called *pt?µtç. 46. Chamomile (chamaemelos) is so called in Greek because it has the aroma of Matian apples (malum) and it is short and close to the ground (cf. yaµa(c), "on the ground"). 47. Germander (chamaedrys; cf. 6puç, "oak") is so called by the Greeks because it is short, spreading out over the ground, and tiny, with very small leaves. 48. Paeon was a certain physician by whom the herb peony (paeonia) is thought to have been discov- ered, as Homer says. Some call it glyciside because it has a sweet taste (cf. y2Umáç, "sweet"; o(c)6?,a plant), or pen- torobina (i.e. pentorobos; cf. psvt?, "five"; opoßoç, "vetch seed") from the number of its seeds, or as others say, dactylos from its resemblance to fingers (cf. 6?mtU2oç, "finger"). It grows in the woods. 49. Bugloss (buglossos) is so called by the Greeks because it has very rough leaves like an ox's tongue (cf. ßouç, "ox"; y2?ooa, "tongue"). The ancients recorded that it should be infused in wine to nourish wisdom in a wonderful way. It is also said to give joy to banquets. It is eaten as a green vegetable.
50. Arnoglossos, that is, 'lamb's tongue' (cf. ?pvóç, "lamb"), is called plantain (plantago) by the Romans, because its cutting (planta) quickly roots in the ground. Many eat it as a vegetable. 51. Herpyllos, which we call 'wild thyme' (serpillus), because its roots snake (serpere) a long way. The same herb is called 'mother's heart'
(animula matris) because it stimulates menstrual flow.
52. Birthwort (aristolochia; cf. ?ptotoç, "best"; 2oy?(c)a, "childbirth") is so called because it is best for women who have just given birth, for applied post partum it purges the womb with the benefit of its vapor. There are two kinds of this herb: one is called 'round birthwort' because it has a round root; the other is 'long birthwort' because it has a long root and also longer branches and leaves. They also call it dactylitis (cf. 6?mtU2oç, "finger") because its root has a finger's strength and length.
53. Groundsel (erigeron) is so named by the Greeks (cf. ?pt, "early, in spring"; yspYv, "old" (the plant is so named for its hoary down)) because it first 'becomes old' (senescere) in spring, whence Latin speakers call it senicio. It grows along garden walls.
54. Psyllios is so called because it has a seed resembling a flea (pulex), whence Latin speakers call it 'fleawort' (herba pulicaris). 55. Hierobotane gets this name from the Greeks (cf. ¬?p? ßot?v?, "sacred herb") because the pagans pronounced it good for people's medicines and bandages and for priests' purification rituals. Whence the high priests called it sagmen, as if the word were sancimen (cf. sancire, "make sacred"); it is also called verbena, because it is pure (cf. verus, "true"). 56. The herb Christ's-thorn (paliurus) is very rough and thorny. Some call soapwort (struthios) the 'woolworker's plant' (herba lanaria) because many of them wash wool with it. It grows in cultivated land. [The fern splenos (cf. asplenos, section 87 below) is so called because it takes away ill-temper (splen).] 57. Cimicia is so called from its resemblance to the bed-bug (cimex), whence the Greeks also called it móptov ("coriander"; cf. móptç, "bedbug"). It grows in both harsh and cultivated land.
58. Horehound (marrubium), which the Greeks call pp?otov, is so called because of its bitterness (amari- tudo). It grows in fields. 59. Pennyroyal (puleium) [is more precious than pepper among the Indians]. 60. Wormwood (absinthium) is a Greek term (i.e. ?y(c)v9tov). The more approved type of it grows in the region of the Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea), whence it is also called absinthium Ponticum. 61. Comfrey (symphytos) is so called in Greek (i.e. oáµ??Utov) because it has so much potency in its root that it draws together scattered chunks of meat in the pot (cf. oUµ??Uttmóç, "causing to draw together"). 62. The polypodion (i.e a fern) is a plant whose root is shaggy and long-haired like an octopus (polypus),
whence is derived the name polypodion. It grows in fri- able, stony soil, or near oaks. 63. The herb named poley- germander (polios) by the Greeks (cf. pó2tov, "hulwort") is called omnimorbia by Latin speakers because it relieves many diseases (morbus; cf. omnis, "all"). It grows in mountains and places with harsh soil.
64. Scammony (scammonia), which Latin speakers call acridium, is an herb full of juice that is collected by digging around its root. To be precise, they dig a round pit in the earth and then, with snail-shells or the leaves of a nut-tree placed below, the juice is collected and taken away once it has dried. The preferred variety quite often comes from Mysia in Asia; a false kind, of opposite quality, is from Syria or Judea. 65. Daucos (i.e. a kind of parsnip or carrot) has leaves like fennel and a stalk two palms long. Citocacia (perhaps the dwarf olive) is so called because it quickly (cito) purges the belly (cf. cacare, "defecate"); commonly and incorrectly it is called citoco- cia. 66. Burdock (lappa) is so called because it has a huge stalk extending across the ground. This herb is called
??t2?v9pYpoç ("man-loving") by the Greeks because it sticks to people's clothing due to its rough surface. It grows by walls.
67. 'Venus's hair' (capillum Veneris) is so called because it reestablishes hair (capillum) lost from alopecia, or because it discourages hair loss, or because it has smooth, black shoots that shine like hair. It grows in wet places.
68. Madder (rubia) is so called because its root is red (rubra), whence it is said to dye wool. 69. 'Dyer's bugloss' (anchusa) stains one's fingers when its root is rubbed; it is blood-colored, and therefore is used by painters for mak- ing crimson. 70. Pine-thistle (chamaeleon) is called vis- carago in Latin because it produces bird-lime (viscum); birds stick to it when they voluntarily come down to eat.
71. Hemlock (cicuta) is so called because on its jointed stalk it has hidden nodes, like a reed - in the same way that we call a hidden ditch 'blind' (caecus). When given to someone to drink this herb kills; Socrates drank it in prison and died. Persius (Satires 4.2):
(Believe him) to say, whom the dire draught of hemlock snatches away.
Although it is poisonous for humans, it makes she-goats fat.
72. Clover (trifolion; cf. folium, "leaf"), which the Greeks call tp(c)??U22ov, is so called because it has three
leaves on each stem-juncture. 73. Mullein (phlomos) - which Latin speakers call 'lamp-herb' (herba lucernaris) because it is used to make lamp-wicks - is also called lucubros because it gives light (lux) in shade (umbra). 
74. Chamomile (pyrethron; cf. section 46 above) is so called in Greek because it has a fiery and clumped root (cf. pup, "fire," and ?9póoç, "crowded together").
75. The marsh mallow (althaea) is the wild mallow (malva), or malvaviscus; called althaea because it rises on high (altum), and viscus ("birdlime"; cf. viscosus, "sticky") because it is sticky. 76. Wild marjoram (ori- ganum), which is translated colena in Latin, because infused in wine it colors (colorare) it.
77. Spurge (titimallum, i.e. tithymalus) takes this name because its 'hair' of foliage, twisting around, turns toward the sunbeams, for the Greeks call the sun ttt?v and hair µa22óç; from the compound of these the term titimallum was derived. There are seven species of it growing in diverse places. 78. Nightshade (strych- nos) is called the 'healing herb' (herba salutaris) in Latin, because it eases headache and acid stomach. It is also called 'wolf-grape' (uva lupina) because its seed looks like a grape. 79. Knot-grass (polygonos) is called by Latin speakers 'bloody herb' (herba sanguinaria) because it causes bleeding when applied to one's nose. 
80. House-leek (ambrosia) is called 'wild parsley' (apium silvaticum) by Latin speakers. About it, Vergil (Aen. 1.403):
And from her head her ambrosial (ambrosius) locks breathed a divine fragrance.
81. Apiago is so called because bees (apis) eagerly seek out its flowers. Purslane (portulaca) . . . 
Rosemary (rosmarinum), which Latin speakers call the 'healing herb' (herba salutaris) for its powers, has leaves like fennel's, rough and spread over the ground in whorls. The Egyptian bean (colocasia) [is the name of a plant]. 82. 'Wild mint' (menta agrestis), which the Greeks called ma2aµ(c)v9?, and we commonly call nepeta ("calamint"), is quite potent and strong in heat. 83. The plant genicularis is spread on the ground to repel scorpi- ons. The gladiolus (gladiolus) has leaves like swords (gla- dius), a stalk a cubit long, and purple flowers. 84. Mullein (verbascum; see sections 73 above and 94 below) . . . Agaric (agaricum), root of a white vine. Calamites (cf. ma2aµ(c)t?ç, "reed-like") . . . Lappa [a kind of herb (see section 66 above)]. Lappago . . . Lapella . . .
Beneola . . . Orcibeta . . . [Satyrion, (see section 43
above)] . . . The ben-nut (myrobalanum) . . . 
85. The asphodel (asphodelus), which Latin speakers call albucium for its color (cf. albus, "white"). Squill (scilla) is so called because it is harmful (cf. the mon- ster Scylla); a pagan superstition about it says that if it is hung whole in a doorway it chases away anything bad.
86. St. John's wort (chamaepitys) is so called by the Greeks because it clings to the earth and smells like pine (cf. yaµa(c), "on the ground"; p(c)tUç, "pine"). Latin speak- ers call it cucurbitularis because it partly recalls the scent of a gourd (cucurbita). Staphysagria grows in pleasant places (cf. ota??ªç ?yp(c)a, "stavesacre"). 87. Spleenwort (asplenos) is so called because it takes away ill-temper (splen; cf. section 56 above). It is also called scolopendrios because its leaves resemble a centipede (scolopendrum). It grows on damp rocks. 88. The vulvus (i.e. bulbus, "edi- ble bulb, onion") is so called because its root is rounded (volubilis) and spherical.
'French lavender' (stoechas) grows on the Stoachades islands, whence it is named. 89. Cyclamen (cyclaminos) is so called in Greek after a certain person named Cyc- los who first discovered the virtues of this herb - or, because it has a rounded root, for the Greeks call a "rounded thing" mám2oç. Its root or its juice, if mixed with wine, makes people drunk. It grows in wooded places or in fields. 90. *µp?2oç 2?Um?, or bryony (bryonia), is called 'white vine' (vitis alba) by Latin speakers, either because of its color or because its root, when pulver- ized and rubbed on one's body, makes the skin softer and whiter. Also the juice of its berry causes dry breasts to produce milk. 91. *µp?2oç µs2atva (i.e. black bry- ony), that is 'black vine' (vitis nigra), is also called 'wild vine' (labrusca); its leaves are like ivy's, and it is larger than white vine in every respect, with similar berries that grow black as they ripen, whence it took its name.
92. The plant viticella is so called by Latin speakers because like a grapevine (vitis) it grasps whatever is nearby with its tendrils, which we call 'ringlets' (anulus).
93. A chrysanthemum (bupthalmus) has a yellow flower like an eye, whence it got its name in Greek (cf. ßouç, "ox"; ò???a2µóç, "eye"). It has a pliant stalk and
leaves like the coriander's, and it grows by city walls.
94. Mullein (phlomos), which Latin speakers call verbas- cum, has a masculine species, with whiter and narrower leaves, and a feminine, with broader and dark leaves (see section 73 above). 95. Fennel (ferula) is so called from its pith, for Varro records that the pith of fennel is what the Greeks call ?o??ó6?2oç. Some say ferula (also mean- ing "rod") is from the verb 'strike' (ferire), for boys and girls would be flogged with it. Its juice is galbanum (gal- banum). 96. Papyrus (papyrum) is so called because it is good for fires and candles, for the Greeks call 'fire' pup. The rush (iuncus) [is so called because it clings with joined (iungere, ppl. iunctus) roots]. 97. The bulrush (scirpus), with which fields of grain are covered, has no
knots, whence Ennius (Satires 27):
They look for a knot, as people say, in a bulrush (scirpus).
And in the proverb, "A hostile person looks for a knot even in abulrush." 98. Theorchella-weed(fucus) is a kind of plant with which clothing is dyed, so called because it counterfeits another color (cf. fucatus, "sham"). Whence Vergil (Ecl. 4.42):
Wool will (no longer) learn to counterfeit colors.
99. Seaweed (alga) grows in water, and is like a crop of grain. Thus it received its name, from the coldness (algor) of water - or, because it binds (alligare) one's feet, because it is thick, with its leaves partly rising above the water. 100. Sedge (ulva) and typhus (cf. tá???, "reed- mace") are plants that grow by springs and bogs and in swamps. Sedge is a pliant seaweed and in a way a fungus, and derives its name from "marsh" (uligo). 101. But typhus becomes inflated with water - whence the 'inflated self-opinion' (tumor) of ambitious and self- satisfied people is called typhus.
102. Reed-grass (carex) is a sharp and very tough plant, resembling Spanish broom. Whence Vergil (Geo. 3.231):
Feeding on sharp reed-grass (carex).
103. 'Spanish broom' (spartus) is a reedy brush without leaves, named for roughness (asperitas), for the coils of rope that are made from it are rough. 104. Grass (gra- men) is rather named for its location, because it grows in most fields (ager, gen. agri), whence the Greeks call it ?ypYottç. However, any plant may be called gra- men, from the fact that it sprouts (germinare), just as robur ("oak," or more generally "wood") is the term for
every kind of wood, as well as for the particular species, because oak is the strongest. 105.A fern (filix) is so called from the singleness of its leaf (folium, cf. filum, "a sin- gle strand"), for from one stalk a cubit high grows one divided leaf, with an intricate structure like a feather's. Oats (avena) . . . Darnel (lolium) .  106. Tares (ziza-
nia), which poets always refer to as the 'unhappy darnel' because it is useless and unfruitful. Hay (faenum) is so called because flame is fed by it, for ???ç means "flame." We call a handful of hay a 'sheaf' (manipulum), and it is called manipulum because it "fills the hand" (manum implere).
x. Garden vegetables (De oleribus) 1. A garden (hor- tus) is so called because something always 'springs up' (oriri) there, for in other land something will grow once a year, but a garden is never without produce. 2. The word 'vegetable' (olus, i.e. holus) is so called from 'nour- ishing' (alere), because humans were first nourished by vegetables, before they ate grain and meat. Indeed, they only fed on the fruits of trees and vegetables, as animals feed on herbage. 3. The stalk (caulis) is generically the term for the middle stem of herbs and vegetables, and is commonly called a thyrsus, because it rises from the 'ground upwards' (terra sursum). From caulis is derived more particularly a certain species of vegetable called 'cabbage' (caulis), because its stalk 'makes strong growth' (coalescere), that is, grows, fuller than that of other veg- etables. It is, moreover, a general term, for any stem (frutex) [is called] a stalk (caulis). 4. The cyme (cyma) is so called as if the word were coma ("hair"), for this term means the crown of vegetable plants or trees, in which is located the natural power to make plant life.
5. The mallow-plant (malva) is named partly from the Greek term µa2?oo?tv ("soften") because its nature is to soften and loosen the bowels. Its juice, if one mixes it with oil and anoints oneself with it, is said to protect against being stung by bees. Its leaves, ground up with oil and applied, are thought to make scorpions sluggish.
6. The carrot (pastinaca) is so called because its root is an excellent nourishment (pastus) for humans, for it has a pleasant aroma and is delectable as a food. 7. The turnip (rapa) is so named from 'seizing' (rapere), that is, 'taking root' (comprehendere, also meaning "seize"). It has a root wider than a navew, sweeter in taste, and has a slender leaf. 8. The navew (napus) is so called from its similarity to the turnip, except that it has broader leaves
and the taste of its root is sharper. The two vegetables have linked names that are almost identical because the seed of one changes into that of the other by turns. As Aemilianus (i.e. Palladius) says (Treatise on Agriculture 8.2.2), a turnip in one soil turns into a navew after two years, while in another soil the navew turns into a turnip.
9. The 'turnip cabbage' (napocaulis) has a name com- posed of the names of two vegetables, because while in taste it resembles the navew (napus), it grows up not as a root vegetable but as a stalk in the manner of cabbage (caulis). Mustard (sinapis) is so called because its leaves are 'like navews' (similis napis). 10. What we call a radish (radix, also meaning "root") the Greeks call raphanus (cf. pa??av(c)ç, "radish"), because it presses entirely downward whereas the other vegetables rather spring upwards. If one has stained one's hands with the crushed seeds of radishes, one will handle snakes with impunity. Fur- ther, even ivory may be whitened by use of a radish. Mixed with food it also resists poison, for radishes, nuts, lupines, citron, and celery are good against poi- son, but against poison taken afterwards, not against poison already ingested. Hence, among the ancients, the custom was to put these foods on the tables before the other foods.
11. Lettuce (lactuca) is so called because it flows with an abundance of milk (lac, gen. lactis), or because it replenishes nursing women with milk. In men it restrains sexual activity. Wild lettuce is what we call serralia (i.e. sarracia) because its back looks like a saw (serra).
12. Chicory (intubus) is a Greek term (cf. ­vtUßoç, "endive"), and is called intubus because it is 'a tube within' (intus tubus). The onion (cepa) is so called because it is only a head (caput). 13. The shallot (ascalo- nia) is named after one of the cities of Palestine called Ascalon, from where it was first imported. 14. Garlic (alium) is so called because it stinks (olere). Ulpicum (i.e. a type of leek) is so named because it has the smell of gar- lic. They say that phaselus (i.e. a bean) was named after the Greek island Phaselos, not far from Mount Olympus.
15. The leek (porrum) has two types, one having a head (capitatus), the other able to be cut (sectilis, i.e. chives). The latter is smaller, the former larger. For us the beet (beta) is a kind of vegetable; for the Greeks it is a letter of the alphabet. Blite (blitum) is a kind of vegetable with a bland taste, as if it were a 'poor beet' (vilis beta).
16. Cucumbers (cucumis, gen. cucumeris) are so called because they are sometimes bitter (amarus); they are
thought to grow sweet if their seeds are steeped in hon- eyed milk. Gourd (cucurbita) . . . Apoperes . . . Water- melon (pepo), melipepo (cf. µs2t, "honey"), and basil (ocimum) are obviously Greek names, and their origin is uncertain to Latin speakers. Olus molle (lit. "soft veg- etable") . . . Orach (atriplex) . . . Brassica (i.e. a kind of cabbage) . . . Olisatrum (i.e. holusatrum, a seashore plant resembling cabbage)   17. Cress (nasturcium)
is named for its savor, because its bitterness 'wrenches one's nose' (nasum torquere). 18. Mushrooms (fungus) are so named because when dried they catch fire at contact, for ???ç means "fire." Whence mushrooms are also commonly called esca (lit., "food") because they are both food for fire and a nutriment. Others say mushrooms are so called because certain kinds of them are killers, whence comes the term 'the defunct' (defunctus).
19. A swelling (tumor) of the earth brings forth the truffle (tuber), and hence gave it its name. The volvus (i.e. a type of edible bulb) is so called because it is rounded (volubilis) and spherical. Asparagus (aspara- gus) is so called because the stalk from which it grows is prickly and rough (asper). 20. The 'caper plant' (cap- paris) seems to have taken its name from the Greeks (i.e. m?ppaptç), because it has a rounded seed-capsule (capitulum) at its tip. The 'wild radish' (armoracia), that is, lapsana . . . Lapistrus   Sorrel (lapathium) taken
with food comforts one's stomach and suppresses sex- ual desire. 21. The thistle (carduus) .  Rocket (eruca),
formed as if it were uruca (cf. urere, "burn"), because it is of fiery potency and if taken often with food it incites the flame of lust. There are two kinds of rocket, one cultivated and the other wild, of sharper potency; both arouse sexual activity.
xi. Aromatic garden plants (De odoratis oleribus)
1. Parsley (apium) is so called because in antiquity the top (apex, gen. apicis), that is the head, of those mak- ing a triumph would be garlanded with it. Hercules was the first to gird his head with this plant - some- times he would wear poplar on his head, sometimes wild olive, sometimes parsley. Parsley's roots effectively fight against lurking poisons. These are its types: petroseli- non, hipposelinon, and oleoselinon. 2. Rock-parsley (pet- roselinon) is so called because it resembles parsley and grows in rocks (cf. pstpoç, "rock") and craggy moun- tains. We can call it petrapium, for os2tvov in Greek
means parsley (apium). The best and most preferred kind is the Macedonian, of sweet taste and spicy aroma.
3. 'Horse-parsley' (hipposelinon; cf. ¯ppoç, "horse") is so called because it is tough and sour. 'Oil-parsley' (oleoselinon; cf. oleum, "oil") is so called because it has a softer leaf and a tender stalk.
4. Latin speakers name one plant 'fennel' (feniculum) because the juice of its root or stalk 'sharpens one's vision' (acuere visum; cf. oculus, "eye"). Concerning its power they say that snakes shed their skins each year after tasting it. The Greeks call this vegetable µ?pa9pov.
5. Lovage (ligusticum) takes its name from a region, for it grows mainly in Liguria; it has a spicy aroma and a sharp taste. 6. The Greeks name an herb ?v?oov, or as Latin speakers call it, 'anise' (anesum), which is known to all, very sharply burning, and diuretic. Dill (anethum) . . . Cummin (cyminum) .   7. Corian-
der (coriandrum) took its name from the Greek, and they call it móptov. Its seed, when given in sweet wine, makes people very prone to sexual activity. If you give more than a proper measure of it, it fosters mad- ness. Also it is reported that gray hair may be dyed by coriander. Southernwood (abrotanum) . . . Chervil (caerefolium) . . . 
8. Rue (ruta) is so called because it produces a sensa- tion of intense heat (perhaps cf. urere, "burn," or ruere, ppl. rutus, "rush"). Another type is wild rue, of sharper power, but both are known to be very hot. Weasels show that rue fends off poisons, because they protect them- selves by eating it when they fight with snakes. 9. Sage (salvia) . . . Elecampane (inula) is called ala by country people, and has an aromatic root of very strong smell with a slight bitterness. Mint (menta): there are six types of it.
