Now in this little book we have noted in a short sketch, as it were, certain principles of the heavenly bodies and locations of the land and expanses of the sea, so that the reader may go through them in a short time, and through this succinct brevity come to know their etymologies and causes. 
i. The world (De mundo) 1. The world consists of the sky and the land, the sea and the creations of God within them. Whence it is said (John 1:10): "And the world was made by him." 'World' (mundus) is named thus in Latin by the philosophers, because it is in eternal motion (motus), as are the sky, the sun, the moon, the air, the seas. Thus no rest is allowed to its elements; on this account it is always in motion. 2. Whence to Varro the elements seemed to be animate, "Because," he says, "they move of their own accord." But the Greeks adopted a term for world (mundus, also meaning "cosmetics") derived from 'ornament,' on account of the diversity of elements and the beauty of the heavenly bodies. They call it móoµoç, which means "ornament," for with our bodily eyes we see nothing more beautiful than the world.
3. There are four zones in the world, that is, four regions: the East and the West, the North and the South.
4. The East (oriens) is named from the rising (exortus) of the sun. The West (occidens) is named because it makes the day set (occidere) and perish, for it hides the light from the world and brings on darkness. 5. The North (septentrio) is so called from the seven (septem) stars at the North Pole (i.e. the Big Dipper), which wheel as they rotate around it. Strictly speaking this is called the vertex (i.e. the celestial pole) because it turns (vertere), as the poet says (Vergil, Aen. 2.250):
The heavens turn (vertere) in the meantime.
6. The South (meridies) is so named either because there the sun makes midday (medium diem), as if the word were medidie, or because at that time the aether sparkles more purely, for merus means "pure." 7. The sky has two portals: the East and the West, for the sun enters through one portal and withdraws through the other. 8. The world has two poles (cardo, i.e. celestial poles), the North and the South, for the sky revolves around them.
ii. Atoms (De atomis) 1. Atoms (atomus) are what the philosophers call certain corporeal particles in the world that are so tiny that they are not visible to sight, and do not undergo toµ?, that is, "splitting," whence they are called ?toµot. They are said to fly through the void of the entire world in unceasing motion and to be carried here and there like the finest dust motes that may be seen pouring in through the window in the sun's rays. Some pagan philosophers have thought that all trees and plants and fruits have their origins from these particles, and that from them fire and water and the universe were born and exist. 2. There are atoms in bodies, in time, and in number. In a body, such as a stone. You may divide it into parts, and the parts into grains, like sand; then divide the grains of sand themselves into the finest dust, until, if you can, you will reach a certain minute particle, which no longer can be divided or split. This particle is the atom in bodies. 3. With reference to time, the atom is understood in this way: you may divide a year, for example, into months, months into days, days into hours. The parts of hours still admit division until you come toa point of time anda speck of an instant such that it cannot be extended through any small interval, and thus can no longer be divided. This is an atom of time. 4. In number, take for example eight divided into four, and four into two, and then two into one. But one is an atom, because it is indivisible. Thus also with letters (i.e. speech-sounds), for speech is divided into words, words into syllables, syllables into letters. But a letter, the smallest part, is an atom and cannot be divided.
Therefore an atom is whatever cannot be divided, like a point in geometry, for tóµoç means "division" in Greek, and ?toµoç means "non-division."
iii. Elements (De elementis) 1. The Greeks call the pri- mary material of things u2? ("matter," also "wood, woodland"), which is not formed in any way, but is capa- ble of underlying all bodily forms; from this material the visible elements (elementum) are formed, whence they took their name from this derivation. Latin speakers have named this u2? 'matter' (materia, also meaning "wood") because every unformed substance, of which something is made, is always called matter. Whence the poets have named it silva (lit. "woodland"), not inappro- priately, because materia is connected with woods. 2. The Greeks name the elements ototy?±a, because they agree with each other in a certain accord and communion of association (cf. ototy?±v, "agree with"). Indeed, they are said to be joined thus among themselves with a certain natural logic, now returning to their origin, from fire to earth, now from earth to fire, since fire ends in air, and air is condensed into water, and water thickens into earth; and in turn, earth is loosened into water, water rarefied into air, and air thinned out into fire. 3. For this reason, all the elements are present in all, but each one has taken its name from whichever element is more abundant in it. The elements are assigned by Divine Providence to the appropriate living beings, for the Creator himself has filled heaven (i.e. the fiery realm) with angels, air with birds, water with fish, and earth with humans and the rest of the living things.
iv. The sky (De caelo) 1. The sky (caelum) is so named because, like an engraved (caelatum) vessel, it has the lights of the stars pressed into it, just like engraved figures; for a vessel which glitters with figures that stand out is called caelatus. God embellished the heaven and filled it with bright light - that is, he adorned it with the sun and the gleaming orb of the moon, and the glorious constellations of glittering stars. [In a different way, it is named from engraving (caelare) the superior bodies.]
2. It is called oùpavóç in Greek, after the term óp?o9at, that is, 'seeing,' because the air is transparent and clearer for seeing. In Sacred Scripture the sky is called the firma- ment (firmamentum), because it is secured (firmare) by the course of the stars and by fixed and immutable laws.
3. Sometimes the word 'sky' is used for the air, where
winds and clouds and storms and whirlwinds arise. Lucretius (cf. On the Nature of Things 4.133):
The sky (caelum), which is called air (aer).
And the Psalm (78:2; 103:12, Vulgate) refers to "fowls of the sky (caelum)," when it is clear that birds fly in the air; out of habit we also call this air, 'sky.' Thus when we ask whether it is fair or overcast we sometimes say, "How is the air?" and sometimes "How is the sky?"
v. Parts of the sky (De partibus caeli) 1. The ether (aether) is the place where the stars are, and signifies that fire which is separated high above from the entire world. Of course, ether is itself an element, but aethra (i.e. another word for ether) is the radiance of ether; it is a Greek word. 2. The sphere (sphaera) of the sky is so named because it has a round shape in appear- ance. But anything of such a shape is called a sphaera by the Greeks from its roundness, such as the balls that children play with. Now philosophers say that the sky is completely convex, in the shape of a sphere, equal on every side, enclosing the earth, poised in the cen- ter of the world's mass. People say that the sky moves, and with its motion the stars fixed in it go around from east to west, with the stars of the Big Dipper proceeding around the pole in shorter rotations. 3. The axis (axis) is a straight line from the North that extends through the center ball of the sphere, and it is called 'axis' because around it the sphere turns like a wheel, or because the Wain (i.e. 'wagon,' another name for the Big Dipper) is there. 4. The poles are the ends of the axis, and they are called poles (cardo, lit. 'pivot') because the sky turns around them. 5. There are circular polar regions that run around the axis. One of them is the northern, which never sets, and is called 'Boreus,' the other is the south- ern, which is never visible, and is called 'Austronotius.' And they are called 'polar regions' (polus), because they are circles around the axis (i.e. "axle"), after the usage of a wagon, named specifically from 'polishing' (polire). But the Boreus polar region is always visible, and the Austronotius never, because the right side of the heav- ens is higher and the southern side is pressed down.
6. The vaults (convexum) are the edges of the sky, named from their curvature, for a convex (convexus) thing is
curved and inclined and bent in the manner of a circle.
7. The Milky Circle (lacteus circulus, i.e. the Milky Way) is the road seen in the sphere of the sky, named for its brightness, because it is white. Some people say that this road is where the sun makes its circuit, and that it shines from the splendor of the sun's transit.
vi. The circles of heaven (De circulis caeli) 1. Our dwelling-place is divided into zones according to the circles of the sky and has allowed some regions to be inhabited due to their mildness, and denied this to other regions due to their excessive cold or heat. There are five zones, which are either called zones (zona, lit. "belt") or circles because they consist of a circle drawn around the sphere of the world. 2. The first of these circles is called the ?pmttmóç ("the Arctic") because enclosed within it can be seen the constellations of the Bears (Arctos) - the name that, imagining the shape of bears, we give to the Septentriones. 3. The second circle is called 9?ptvòç (i.e. "summer") tpoptmóç because the sun, when caus- ing summer at the northern edge of this circle, does not go beyond this circle, but immediately turns back, and thus it is called tpoptmóç ("at the turning point"). 4. The third circle is ¡µ?ptvóç, which is called the equinoctial (aequinoctialis) by Latin speakers because the sun, when it reaches this region, makes an equinox (aequinoctium). In Latin ¡µ?ptvóç (in Greek actually "of day") is trans- lated as 'day and night,' and in this circle we observe that the medial segment of the sphere (i.e. the equator) is set.
5. The fourth circle is called ?vtapmttmóç because it is opposite to the circle we call ?pmttmóç. 6. The fifth circle is the y?tµ?ptvòç (i.e. "winter") tpoptmóç, which in Latin is called 'winter' or 'of the winter solstice,' because when it comes to this circle the sun makes winter for those who live in the north and summer for those in the southern parts. 7. The zodiac is a circle . . .
vii. Air and clouds (De aere et nube) 1. Air is an empti- ness of more open texture than other elements. Con- cerning it Vergil says (Aen. 12.354):
Following (him) through the long emptiness.
Air (aer) is named from the word a­p?tv (i.e. ??(c)p?tv, "to raise") because it bears the earth or because it is
borne. The term refers partly to earthy and partly to heavenly material. That which is very fine, where winds and tempests cannot exist, makes up the celestial part, but that which is more turbulent, which takes on bod- ily substance with exhalations of moisture, is defined as earthy; it gives rise to many forms of itself. For when it is stirred, it makes winds; when more vehemently agi- tated, it makes lightning and thunder; when compressed, clouds; when condensed, rain; when it has frozen clouds, snow; when denser clouds freeze with more turbulence, hail; when it expands, bright weather. Thus dense air is cloud, and dispersed and loosened cloud is air.
2. Clouds (nubes) are named from'veiling' (obnubere), that is, covering the sky; whence also brides (nupta), because they veil their faces, and also Neptune (Nep- tunus), because he casts a veil (nubere), that is, covers the sea and earth. The condensation of air makes clouds, for the winds lump the air together and make a cloud, whence this in Vergil (Aen. 5.20):
And the air is forced into a cloud.
viii. Thunder (De tonitruo) 1. Thunder (tonitrus) is so named because the sound of it terrifies, for a tone (tonus) is a sound. Sometimes this shakes everything so violently that it seems to have split the sky, because, when a blast of very violent wind suddenly throws itself into clouds, with an increasingly powerful whirlwind seeking an exit, with a great crash it tears through the cloud, which it has hollowed out, and thus thunder is carried to the ears with a horrendous din. 2. No one should be amazed at this, since when a vessel explodes it makes a loud noise, however small it is. A flash of lightning is produced at the same time as the thunder, but it is seen sooner because it is bright; thunder reaches the ears later. The light that appears before the thunder is called a 'lightning bolt' (fulgetra). As we have said, it is seen first because its light is bright, and the thunder comes to one's ears later.
ix. Lightning (De fulminibus) 1. Lightning (fulgur) and the 'lightning bolt' (fulmen), the strokes of a celestial dart, are named from 'striking' (ferire); for to 'flash' (ful- gere) is to 'strike' and to 'cut through.' Colliding clouds cause lightning, for the collision of any things creates fire, as we notice with stones, and the rubbing of wheels, and in forests of trees; in a similar way fire occurs in clouds.
For this reason the clouds come first, then the fires.
2. Lightning bolts are made in the clouds by the wind and fire, and are sent out by a blast of wind. Hence the fire of lightning has a greater power to penetrate, because it is made of finer elements than our fire, that is, the fire we make use of. It has three names: fulgus, fulgor and fulmen. Fulgus because is touches (tangere), fulgor because it ignites and burns (urere), and fulmen because it splits (findere). Hence lightning bolts are represented with three rays.
x. The rainbow and phenomena of the clouds (De arcu et nubium effectibus) 1. The celestial rainbow (arcus) is named for its likeness to the curve of a bow (also arcus). Iris is its proper name. It is called iris as if the word were aeris, that is, something that descends to earth through the air (aer). It takes its light from the sun, whenever hol- low clouds receive the sun's rays from the opposite side and make the shape of a bow. This circumstance gives it various colors, because the thinned water, bright air, and misty clouds, when illuminated, create various colors. 2. Rain-clouds (pluvia) are so called because they flow, as if the word were 'streams' (fluvia). They arise out of the earth and sea through exhalation. When they are lifted higher, or dissolved by the heat of the sun, or compressed by the force of the wind, they fall as rain onto the earth. 3. A 'storm cloud' (nimbus) is a stormy, dark mass of cloud, and the word nimbus comes from 'cloud' (nubes). The rains from storm clouds are sudden and precipitate. We can also refer to rains (pluvia) as 'leisurely' and 'contin- ual,' just like streams (fluvia) or flowing (fluens) things.
4. Downpours (imber) have to do with both clouds and rains, and are named with a Greek term (cf. oµßpoç, "rainstorm") because they soak (inebriare) the ground so that germination can take place. Indeed, all things are created thanks to these, as Lucretius (On the Nature of Things 1.715):
(All things) are born from fire, earth, breath, and downpours.
Moreover, this is a Greek name.
5. Hail (grando) is so named because it has the shape of grains (grana). These are hardened in the cloud by the rigor of the winds, solidified into snow, and released when the air is rent. 6. Snow (nix) is named from the cloud (nubes) whence it falls, while ice (glacies) is named from 'freezing' (gelu) and 'water' (aqua), as if the
word were gelaquies, that is, 'frozen water' (gelata aqua).
7. Frost (gelus) is named because the earth is bound by it, for the earth is called y?. Further, the earth is bound by a heavier frost when the night is clear. 8. Hoar-frost (pruina) is a freezing during the morning hours, and it took this name because it burns like a fire - for the word pup means "fire," and 'burning' pertains both to freez- ing and to the sun. Thus by a single word two different processes are signified, because they have a single effect. Indeed, the forces of freezing and of heat are similar, and either of them can split stones. Thus heat burns, as in (Vergil, Aen. 4.68):
The wretched Dido burns.
And freezing burns, as in (Vergil, Geo. 1.93):
Or the piercing cold of the north wind burns.
9. Dew (ros, gen. roris) is a Greek term, for they call it 6póooç. Some people think it is called ros because it is fine (rarus), and not thick like rain. 10. Mist (nebula) is named from the same source as nubila ("overcast sky"), that is, from 'veiling' (obnubere), that is, hiding the earth, or it is what 'flying cloud' (nubes volans) makes. Damp valleys exhale mist and clouds are formed; thence comes overcast sky, thence snow. Mists seek the lowest point when it is clear, the highest when it is cloudy. Fog is a shadow formed from a thickness of air. 11. And it is called fog (caligo) because it is mainly generated from the warmth (calor) of the air. 12. Darkness (tenebrae) is named because it 'holds shadows' (tenere umbras). Actually, darkness is nothing, but the very absence of light is called darkness, just as silence is not some actual thing, but when there is no sound, it is called silence. Thus darkness is not something, but when there is no light, it is called darkness. 13.A shadow (umbra) is air that is lacking sunlight. It is so named because it occurs when we block (obicere) the rays of the sun. It is movable and unsettled, and arises from the circuit of the sun and the movement of the winds. Whenever there is movement in the sun, a shadow seems to move with us, because wherever we block some spot from the rays of the sun, in the same way we remove the light from it. Thus a shadow seems to walk along with us and to imitate our gestures.
14. Light (lux) is the substance itself, while illumination (lumen) is so called because it 'emanates from light' (a luce manare), that is, it is the brightness of light - but authors confuse this.
xi. Winds (De ventis) 1. Wind is air that is stirred up and put into motion, and it is assigned different names according to the different parts of the sky. It is named wind (ventus) because it is furious (vehemens) and vio- lent (violentus), for its power is such that it not only uproots rocks and trees but even disturbs the sky and the earth and tosses the seas. 2. There are four princi- pal winds: the first of these, from the east, is Subsolanus; from the south is Auster; from the west Favonius; and from the north blows a wind of the same name (i.e. Septentrio, "the north"). Each of these has a pair of winds associated with it. 3. Subsolanus has Vulturnus from the right side and Eurus from the left; Auster has Euroauster from the right and Austroafricus from the left; Favonius has Africus from the right and Corus from the left; finally Septentrio has Circius from the right and Aquilo from the left. These twelve winds whirl around the globe of the world with their blowing. 4. Their names were assigned for specific reasons; for Subsolanus is named because it arises beneath (sub) the rising of the sun (sol); Eurus because it blows from  Ûç, that is, from the East, for it is related to Subsolanus; Vulturnus, because it 'resounds deeply' (alte tonare). 5. Concerning this Lucretius says (On the Nature of Things 5.743):
Deep-resounding (altitonans) Vulturnus and Auster, brandishing lightning.
6. Auster is named from gathering (aurire, i.e. haurire) waters, with which it makes the air thick and feeds the rain-clouds. It is called vótoç in Greek, because it some- times corrupts the air (cf. vo9?á?tv, "corrupt, adulter- ate"), for when Auster blows, it brings to other regions pestilence, which arises from corrupted air. But just as Auster brings pestilence, so Aquilo drives it away. Euroauster is named because on one side it links with Eurus and on the other with Auster.
7. Austroafricus because it is joined on its left and right with Auster and Africus. This is also called Libonotus, because on one side of it is Libs (i.e. Africus) and on the other Notus (i.e. Auster). 8. [Favonius is named because it nourishes (fovere) fruits and flowers. In Greek this is Zephyrus, because it generally blows in the spring; whence this (Vergil, Geo. 1.44):
And the crumbling soil loosens with the Zephyr (i.e. west wind).]
Zephyrus is called by this name in Greek because it gives life (cf. SY?, "life") to flowers and seeds with its breath. In Latin it is called Favonius because it nurtures (fovere) the things that are generated, for flowers are released by Auster and fashioned by Zephyrus. 9. Africus is named from its particular region, for it is in Africa that it starts to blow. 10. Corus is the one that blows from the west in the summer, and it is called Corus because it closes the circle of winds, and makes them like a ring- dance (chorus). Earlier it was called Caurus, and most people call it Argestes - not Agrestis as the ignorant com- mon people do. 11. Septentrio is so named because it rises in the circle of the seven (septem) stars (i.e. the Big Dipper), which, when one's head is tipped back, seem to be carried by the world turning itself. 12. Circius is named because it is next to Corus. The Spanish call it Gallicus, because it blows on them from the direction of Galicia. 13. Aquilo is named because it constrains the waters (aqua) and dissipates clouds, for it is a cold dry wind. It is also called Boreas, because it blows from the Hyperborean mountains - for that is the source of this wind, whence it is cold. The nature of all the septentri- onal winds is cold and dry, and that of the austral winds is moist and warm. 14. And of all the winds, there are two principal ones: Septentrio and Auster. 15. The Etesiae are gusts from Aquilo, and they have been given their name because they begin to blow at a specific season of the year, for svtaUtóç is the Greek word for 'year' (cf. also stoç, "year"). These make a straight course from the north into Egypt; they blow opposite to Auster.
16. Besides these there are two everywhere that are more puffs of air than winds: the breeze and the sea- breeze. 17. The breeze (aura) is named from air (aer), as if the word were aeria, because it is a gentle motion of air; for air that is stirred up makes a breeze, whence Lucretius says (On the Nature of Things 5.503):
Airy breezes (Aerias auras) . . . 
18. The sea-breeze (altanus), which is over the seas, is derived from the term 'the deep' (altus), that is, the sea. It is different from the wind that blows on the shore, which we have named a breeze, for a breeze is associated with the land. 19.A whirlwind (turbo) is a whirling of winds, and it is named from 'soil' (terra), whenever the wind surges and sends the soil into a spiral. 20. Storm (tempes- tas, also meaning "period of time") is named either for 'season' (tempus), just as historians are always using it
when they say, "in that tempestas"- or it is named from the condition (status) of the sky, because due to its size, a storm brews for many days. Spring and autumn are the seasons when the biggest storms occur, when it is not full summer and not full winter. Hence storms are created out of a confluence of opposing airs at the midpoint and change of these two seasons. 21.A thunder-peal (fragor) is named from the sound of things being broken (frangere), because anything dry and brittle breaks easily. 22.A gale (procella) is so named because it 'hits hard' (percellere), that is, it strikes (percutere) and uproots (evellere); it is the power of wind along with rain. Gales are caused by lightning or winds. Nothing is faster than the winds, and because of their swiftness poets picture both winds and lightning as winged, as in (Vergil, Aen. 8.430):
Of winged Auster . . . 
xii. Waters (De aquis) 1. Water (aqua) is so named because its surface is 'even' (aequalis), hence it is also called aequor (lit. "level surface," used metaphorically for the sea), because its height is even. 2. The two most potent elements of human life are fire and water, whence those to whom fire and water are forbidden are gravely condemned. 3. The element of water rules over all the rest, for water tempers the sky, makes the earth fertile, gives body to the air with its exhalation, ascends to the heights, and claims the sky for itself. Indeed, what is more amazing than water standing in the sky? 4. And it is not enough that it reaches such a height, but it snatches a school of fish with it (i.e., perhaps, in a waterspout), and when poured out becomes the cause of all growing things on earth. It brings forth fruits and trees, produces shrubs and grasses, cleans away filth, washes away sins, and provides drink for all living creatures.
xiii. Different kinds of water (De diversitate aquarum)
1. There is a great diversity in the different qualities of water, for some water is salty, some alkaline, some with alum, some sulfuric, some tarry, and some containing a cure for illnesses. Near Rome the waters of the Abula (i.e. the Tiber) heal wounds. 2. In Italy the spring of Cicero cures eye injuries. In Ethiopia there is a lake that makes bodies drenched with it glisten, just as oil does. The spring of Zama in Africa makes voices melodious. Whoever drinks from Lake Clitorius in Italy will have a distaste for wine. 3. There is said to be a spring on the
island of Chios that makes people sluggish. In Boeotia there are two fountains; one confers memory, the other, forgetfulness. The fountain of Cyzicus removes carnal desire. 4. In Boeotia there is a lake that causes madness; whoever drinks from it burns with the heat of lust. In Campania there are waters that are said to cure sterility in women and insanity in men. Whoever drinks from the fountain Rubrus in Ethiopia becomes frantic. 5. The fountain Leinus in Arcadia does not allow an untimely birth to occur. In Sicily there are two fountains; one of them makes the sterile fertile, and the other renders the fertile sterile. In Thessaly there are two rivers; sheep drinking from one of them become black, those drinking from the other white, and those drinking from both have mixed colors. 6. The lake Clitumnus in Umbria produces very large oxen. The hooves of livestock are hardened by the swamp water of Reate. Nothing that is alive is able to sink in the lake Asphaltites (i.e. the Dead Sea) in Judea.
7. In India there is a standing pool called Side, in which nothing can swim; everything sinks. In contrast to this, everything floats in the lake Apuscidamus in Africa and nothing sinks. The spring of Marsida in Phrygia casts up stones. In Achaea, water called the Styx flows from rocks; this water, when it is drunk, kills immediately. 8. The Gelonian pool of Sicily repels those who approach it with its foul smell. There is a spring in Africa around the temple of Ammon that binds soil together with the bonds of its water; it even solidifies ashes into soil. The fountain of Job in Idumaea is said to change color four times a year; that is, dust-colored, blood-colored, green, and clear. It keeps each one of these colors for three months out of the year. 9. There is a lake in the country of the Troglodytes; three times a day it becomes bitter, and then, just as often, sweet again. The Siloan spring at the foot of Mount Zion has no continuous flow of water, but bubbles forth at certain hours and days. In Judea a certain river used to go dry every Sabbath. 10. In Sardinia warm springs heal eyes, and expose thieves, for when blindness is cured, their crimes are revealed. They say there is a spring in Epirus in which lit torches are extinguished and extinguished torches are lit. According to the Garamantes (i.e. Africans) there is a fountain that is too cold to drink from during the day, and too hot to touch at night. 11. Indeed, in many places waters now flow with perpetual boiling of such vigor that they make baths hot. There are some lands that have a great deal of sulfur and alum. And thus, when the cold water comes
through hot passages, it is affected by the adjacent heat of the sulfur and is itself heated; it does not flow from its source at such a temperature, but is changed as it travels. Indeed, waters may carry sulfur and alum with them; both materials are full of fire and grow hot with the slightest movement.
xiv. The sea (De mari) 1. A sea is a general gathering of waters, for every confluence of waters, whether they are salt or fresh, is, loosely, a 'sea,' according to this (Genesis 1:10): "And the gathering together of waters, he called seas (maria)." But strictly speaking something is called sea (mare) because its waters are bitter (amarus).
2. The sea-surface (aequor) is named because it is evenly (aequaliter) raised up, and although surging waters may swell up like mountains, when the storms have quieted the sea-surface returns to flatness. The depth of the sea varies, but the appearance of its surface is unvarying. 3. The reason why the sea has no increase in its size, even though it receives all the rivers and springs, is partly because its own huge size is not affected by the waters flowing in; then again, it is because the bitter water con- sumes the fresh water flowing in; or because the clouds themselves draw up and absorb a great deal of water; or because the winds carry away part of the sea, and the sun dries up part; finally, because it is percolated through certain hidden openings in the earth, and runs back again to the source of springs and fountains. The sea has no specific color; it changes with the quality of the winds. Sometimes it is golden, sometimes muddy, and sometimes black.
xv. The Ocean (De oceano) 1. Greek and Latin speakers so name the 'Ocean' (oceanus) because it goes around the globe (orbis) in the manner of a circle (circulus), [or from its speed, because it runs quickly (ocius)]. Again, because it gleams with a deep blue color like the sky: oceanus as if the word were mU?v?oç ("blue"). This is what encircles the edges of the land, advancing and reced- ing with alternate tides, for when the winds blow over
the deep, the Ocean either disgorges the seas or swal- lows them back. 2. Also, the Ocean takes different names from nearby areas, such as Gallic, Germanic, Scythian, Caspian, Hyrcanian, Atlantic, Gaditanian. The Gadi- tanian straits (i.e. the Straits of Gibraltar) are named from Gades (i.e. Cadiz), where the entrance of the Great Sea (i.e. the Mediterranean) first opens from the Ocean. Hence, when Hercules came to Gades he placed pillars there, believing that the end of the lands of the world was at that place.
xvi. The Mediterranean Sea (De mediterraneo mari)
1. The Great Sea is the one that flows from the Ocean out of the west, turns to the south, and finally stretches to the north. It is called 'great' because the other seas are smaller in comparison with it. This is also called the Mediterranean because it flows through the 'mid- dle of the land' (media terrae) all the way to the East, separating Europe, Africa, and Asia. 2. The curve of its first part, which washes the Spanish regions, is called Iberian and Balearic. Then comes the Gallic part, which washes against the province of Narbonne (i.e. present- day southern France). Soon it becomes the Ligurian Sea, which is near the city of Genoa. After this is the Tyrrhe- nian Sea, which touches Italy - the Greeks call this the Ionian, and the Italians the Inferum (lit. 'the lower'). And then the Sea of Sicily which goes from Sicily to Crete. And then the Sea of Crete, which extends to Pamphylia and Egypt. 3. And then the Hellespont, which after turning north, with many a deep inlet around the various shores of Greece and Illyricus, narrows into a passage seven stades across. At this point Xerxes made a bridge of ships and crossed into Greece; Abydos is there. From there it widens into open sea and is hemmed back again and makes the Propontis (i.e. the Sea of Marmara), which is soon narrowed to fifty passus (i.e. about 250 feet) and becomes the Thracian Bosphorus, where Darius trans- ported his forces. 4. From there begins the vast Pontic gulf, with the marshes of Maeotis (i.e. the Sea of Azov) at its furthest point. This sea has fresher water than the others because of the great number of rivers, and is foggy and rather shallow. Accordingly it is called Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea), because it is traversable (cf. pons, gen. pontis, "bridge"), and for that reason it supports seals, tuna, and dolphins, but no larger sea-creatures.
5. And just as the land, though it is a single thing, may be referred to with various names in different places, so
also this Great Sea is named with different names accord- ing to the region; for it is called Iberian and Asiatic from the names of provinces, and Balearic, Sicilian, Cretan, Cypriot, Aegean, Carpathian from the names of islands. Between Tenedos and Chios there is in the sea a rock - rather than an island - which is believed to look, to those who view it from a distance, like a she-goat, which the Greeks call a­( (gen. a"yóç) - and from this the Aegean Sea is named. Thus also the Carpathian Sea between Egypt and Rhodes is named from the island Carpathos which is situated there. 6. The Gallic, Ausonian, Dal- matian and Ligurian Seas are named from peoples. The Argolic, Corinthian, Tyrian and Adriatic Seas are named from cities, for Adria was a certain city near the Illyrian Sea, which gave its name to the Adriatic Sea. 7. They may be named from their position with respect to the sky, such as the Upper (Superum) and the Lower (Inferum) Seas - because the east is upper and the west is lower - that is, the Tuscan (i.e. Tyrrhenian, known as Mare Inferum) and the Adriatic (Superum).
They may be named as a memorial to a king, such as the Ionian. Thus Io was the king of Greece, whence the Athenians are also known as Ionians. This sea is also called the Tyrrhenian, either because it washes against Tuscany - that is, Tyrrhenia - or from the Tyrrhenian sailors who threw themselves into this sea. One should know that the Ionian Sea is a huge curve from Ionia to Sicily, and has as its parts the Adriatic, the Achaean, and the Epirotic Seas. The Euxine Sea (i.e. the Black Sea) is named from the behavior of those who live beside it (cf. ?u(?tvoç, "hospitable"); earlier it was called 'Axenus.'
8. Seas may be named from the calamities of people who perished in them, such as the Hellespont, the Icar- ian and the Myrtoan. Now the Myrtoan sea is named from the drowning of Myrtilus, because at this spot he was thrown in by Oenomaus. Icarus was from Crete, as the stories have it, and in seeking the heights, when his feathers had been loosened by the heat of the sun, he gave his name to the sea in which he fell and perished. Phrixus, also fleeing with his sister Helle from their step- mother's snares, embarked on a ship bearing the sign of the ram, on which he escaped. But his sister Helle, a victim of shipwreck, died in the sea, and once dead gave her name to the Hellespontic Sea. 9. The Propontis (i.e. the Sea of Marmara) is named from the direction of the current, for it is called Propontis because it comes before the Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea). The Bosphorus is named
from the ford (cf. pópoç, "ford") or narrow crossing for cattle (bos). The Egyptian Sea is assigned to Asia, the Gallic to Europe, and the African to Libya - for they are assigned to those regions that are closest to them. 10. A pelagus is an expanse of sea without shore or harbor; it is named after the Greek term p2?ytoç ("oblique"), that is, "breadth," whence also 'open beach' (plagia), because they are without harbors.
xvii. Gulfs of the sea (De sinibus maris) 1. The larger inlets of the sea are called gulfs (sinus), as the Ionian in the Mediterranean, and in the Ocean, the Caspian, Indian, Persian and the Arabian gulf - which is also the Red Sea, which is assigned to the Ocean. 2. The Red Sea is so named because it is colored with reddish waves; however, it does not possess this quality by its nature, but its currents are tainted and stained by the neighbor- ing shores because all the land surrounding that sea is red and close to the color of blood. From there a very intense vermilion may be separated out, as well as other pigments with which the coloring of paintings is varied.
3. Therefore, since the soil has this nature, it is washed away in rivers, and whatever pigment is eroded lends color to the water. It is for this reason that red gem- stones are found on these shores, for when a pebble covered with this type of soil is eroded in the sand, it has the color of both the earth and the sea. 4. The Red Sea is divided into two gulfs. Of these, the one to the east is called the Persian Gulf because the Persians live at its mouth. The other is called the Arabian, because it is next to Arabia.
xviii. Tides and straits (De aestibus et fretis) 1. Tides pertain to the Ocean, and straits pertain to the connec- tion between two seas. A tide (aestus) is a rising or falling of the sea, that is, a restlessness, whence also the word 'estuary' (aestuaria), through which the sea by turns rises and falls. 2. But 'straits' (fretum) are named because there the sea is always seething (fervere); for a strait is narrow, a 'seething sea' (fervens mare) as it were, named from the agitation of the waves, as if it were 'agitating the sea' (fer- vens mare), like the Straits of Gibraltar or of Sicily. Varro (Latin Language 7.22) says that they are called fretum as if the word were 'violently agitated' (fervidus), that is, 'seething' (ferventia), and having the motion of 'extreme agitation' (fervor). 3. Sallust (Histories, 4.26) writes that the Straits of Sicily, which are called Rhegium, are named
for this reason, that at one time Sicily had been joined to Italy, and when they were a single land, the inter- vening space was either overwhelmed by the waters due to its low elevation, or was cut through due to its nar- rowness. And it is named `P?ytov because in Greek this word means "broken off" (cf. p?yváµat, "break apart"). It is exceedingly narrow, dividing Sicily from Italy by a distance of three Roman miles, and is notorious for fab- ulous monsters; on one side appears Scylla, and on the other Charybdis. 4. Indeed, neighboring people give the name Scylla to a rock jutting over the sea that is similar to the fabled shape when seen from a distance. Accord- ingly they have attributed to it the monstrous appearance of the story, as if it had the shape of a human girded with the heads of dogs, because the current rushing together there seems to produce the sound of barking. 5. Charyb- dis is named because it swallows ships up in its hidden maelstrom, for it is a sea filled with whirlpools, and for that reason mangled shipwrecks come out of its depths. Three times a day its waters rise, and three times a day it sucks them back in, for it takes waters in so that it may spit them back out, and spits them out so that it may take them back in again. 6. The Syrtes are sandy places in the sea. Sallust (War with Jugurtha 78.3) says they are called Syrtes from 'dragging' (cf. oápt?ç, "cord for dragging, rein," from oáp?tv, "drag") because they drag everything towards themselves, and they cling fast to whoever approaches the shallows of the sea. These places are in the sea near Egypt, close to one another and confused with one another. 'Shallows' (vadum), how- ever, are those places in which people and animals can cross (vadere) the sea or rivers on foot; Vergil calls them 'shoals' (brevia), and the Greeks ßpaysa.
xix. Lakes and pools (De lacis et stagnis) 1. There are certain bodies of water that are not mixed with the cur- rents of the Ocean or the Mediterranean, and these are called lakes and pools. 2.A lake is a basin in which water is held and not mixed with currents, such as Lake Asphalti, Lake Benacus (i.e. present-day Garda), Lake Larius (i.e. Como), and the others which the Greeks call 2(c)µvat, that is, 'pools.' Springs fall into streams, and rivers rush into channels, but a lake stays in place and does not flow forth. And it is called lake (lacus) as if the term were 'place' (locus) of water. 3. Lake Asphalti (i.e. Lake Asphaltites) is the same as the Dead Sea, so named because it gener- ates nothing living and tolerates no type of living crea-
ture, for it has no fish and does not allow itself to be used by birds that are accustomed to water and rejoice at diving. But whatever living creatures you might try to submerge in it, they would spring back up; by whatever procedure they were immersed, and however firmly they were shoved in, they would immediately be cast out. It is not moved by winds, since the asphalt, which makes its water stand still, is resistant to winds. Nor does it allow sailing, because everything that is not alive sinks into its depths, and it does not support any material unless it is made bright with asphalt. 4. People say that a lighted lamp floats on top, but when its light is extinguished, it sinks. This is also called the Salt Sea, or Lake Asphalti, that is, 'of bitumen,' and it is in Judea between Jericho and Zoara. In length it stretches 780 stades (i.e. about ninety miles) to Zoara in Arabia and its width is 150 stades, up to the neighborhood of Sodom.
5. Lake Tiberius is named from the town Tiberias, which Herod at one time founded in honor of Tiberius Caesar, and it is more salubrious than all the other lakes in Judea, and more efficacious somehow at healing bod- ies. Its circumference in stades   6. Lake Gennesaret
(i.e. the Sea of Galilee, the same as Lake Tiberius) is the biggest in Judea with a length of 140 stades, and a width of 40. It has choppy waters and produces a breeze for itself not from the winds, but from its own self. For this reason it is named with a Greek word, Genesar, as if the term were 'generating a breeze for itself' (gener- ans sibi auram). The Lake, then, is agitated over a wide area by these frequent puffing breezes, with the result that it is pure draught, sweet and good for drinking. 7. Benacus (i.e. Garda) is a lake in Italy, in Venetia, whence the river Mincius arises. Due to its size, this lake imitates the storms of the sea. 8. Lucrinus and Avernus are lakes in Campania. Lucrinus is so named because at one time it furnished great revenues (cf. lucrum, "profit") due to its abundance of fish. Lake Avernus was named because birds (avis) were unable to fly over it, for in an earlier time it was so surrounded with a thick forest that the overpowering odor of its sulfurous water, evaporating in an enclosed space, would kill the birds flying over it with its exhalation. Caesar Augustus on hearing of this cut down the trees and made the place pleasant again, restored from its unwholesome state. 9. Further,a lake is the same as a pool where an immense amount of water collects. And it is called 'pool' (stagnus) because there the water stands (stare) and does not run forth.
xx. Theabyss(Deabysso) 1. The abyss is an impenetra- ble depth of waters, either caves of hidden waters from which springs and rivers rise, or waters that secretly flow below the earth, whence it is called the abyss (abyssus, cf.
?ßUoooç, "fathomless," from a- "without" + ßáoooç, "depth"). Indeed, all waters, even if they are torrents,
return through hidden passages to the central abyss.
2. Surges (fluctus) are so named because they arise from blowing winds (flatus), for waters that are agitated by the force of winds 'surge up' (fluctuare). Aqua is water that is still and level (aequalis), without motion. 3. Buta 'wave' is rising water that is always in motion. Lucretius (On the Nature of Things 2.152):
Aerial waves (undas),
that is, motion, and the mass that surges and falls back. A wave is not water per se, but water in a certain motion and agitation, whence it is called wave (unda), as if from 'going' (eundo) and 'returning' (redeundo).
4. Latex, strictly speaking, is the liquid of a fountain, and is called latex because it hides (latere) in the passages of the earth. 5.A drop (gutta) is that which stands hang- ing, stilla (i.e. another word for 'drop') is that which falls. Hence the word stillicidium (i.e. drippings from eaves), as if it were 'falling drop' (stilla cadens). Stiria (lit. "frozen drop, icicle," here simply "drop") is a Greek word, that is 'drop' (gutta); from it the diminutive that we call stilla is formed. As long as it stands or hangs suspended from roofs or trees, it is a gutta, as if 'glutinous' (glutinosus), but when it has fallen it is a stilla. 6. Foam (spuma) is named because it is spewn (spuere); it consists of the residue of waves; whence new wine, and things that are boiled, are purified by foam. Hence also the word 'spit' (sputum).
xxi. Rivers (De fluminibus) 1. A river (fluvius) is an unceasing flow of water, named from perpetually flowing (fluere). Strictly speaking, flumen is the water itself, while fluvius is the channel of the water. The word flumen is earlier than fluvius, that is, water comes before its flow. There are two types of river; one isa torrent and the other is 'naturally flowing' (vivus). Concerning the latter type, Vergil says (Aen. 2.719):
Until I have bathed myself in running (vivus) water.
2. A torrent is water that is flowing furiously. It is called a torrent (torrens) because it increases with the rain, and
during a drought it 'becomes parched' (torrescere), that is, it dries up. Concerning it Pacuvius (fr. 13) says:
The torrent dries up (torrens torrere) with the fiery vapor.
The Greeks assigned a torrent its name from winter (cf. y?tµ?ppooç, "winter-flowing; torrent"), while we assigned it from summer; they named it from the sea- son in which it is renewed and we from the season in which it dries up. 3. An amnis (i.e. another word for 'river') is a river surrounded by forests and leafy boughs and is called amnis from its pleasantness (amoenitas).
4. Strictly speaking the 'channel' (decursus) is the bound- ary of a course (cursus), whether of water or of whatever else you like. Ditches (rivus) are so named because they are diverted (derivare) for irrigation, that is, for bringing water into the fields, for 'to irrigate' is to 'bring in.' A whirlpool (gurges) is, strictly speaking, a deep spot in a river. 5. A well (puteus) is a place that has been dug out, from which water is drawn. It is so named from 'drinking' (potatio). A spring (fons) is a source of water springing forth, as if it were 'pouring out' (fundere) water.
6. Some rivers have taken their names for specific reasons; some of these should be noted, as they are fre- quently mentioned in histories. 7. Geon is a river going out of Paradise and surrounding all Ethiopia; it is called by this name because it irrigates the land of Egypt with the rising of its floods, for y? in Greek means "earth" in Latin. This river is called the Nile by the Egyptians on account of the mud that it carries, which makes the land fertile; hence it is called Nile, as if the term were vsa "2áç ("new mud"). The Nile used to be called Melo in Latin. It arises in Lake Nilides; from there it turns to the south, and is received by Egypt, where it is struck by winds from the north, and swells up as its waters struggle against them, and causes the flooding of Egypt.
8. The Ganges is the river that the Sacred Scriptures call Phison, going out from Paradise and continuing on to the regions of India. And it is called Phison, that is, 'throng,' because it is filled with ten great tributaries and is made into one. It is called Ganges from Gangarus, the king of India. This river is said to rise up in the manner of the Nile and burst out over the lands of the Orient.
9. The Tigris is a river in Mesopotamia, rising from Par- adise and continuing up toward Assyria, and after much
twisting it flows into the Dead Sea. It is called by this name on account of its speed, like that animal, the tiger (tigris), which runs exceedingly fast. 10. The Euphrates is a river in Mesopotamia rising from Paradise, well supplied with gemstones; it flows through the middle of Babylonia. This river took its name from fruits, or from abundance, for in Hebrew Ephrata means "fertil- ity," and it irrigates Mesopotamia in certain regions just as the Nile irrigates Alexandria. Sallust, a most trust- worthy authority, asserts (Histories 4.77) that the Tigris and the Euphrates flow from a single source in Armenia; taking different courses they flow further apart, leaving a space of many miles in between. The land that they surround is called Mesopotamia (Greek "land between the rivers"). Based on this, Jerome notes (Site and Names of Hebrew Places 202 [PL 23.939]) that these rivers should be understood as different from the rivers flowing from Paradise.
11. The Indus is a river of the Orient, which empties into the Red Sea. 12. In very ancient times Hystaspes was a king of the Medes, from whom the spring in the Orient that is now called Hydaspes takes its name. Concerning this Lucan . . . (see Civil War 3.236, 8.227, mentioning the Indus and Hydaspes). Although it is a Persian river, it is nevertheless said to flow toward the east. 13. The Arar is a river of the Orient. Concerning it Vergil says (Ecl. 1.62):
Or (sooner) shall the Parthian drink from the Arar,
for it flows through Parthia and Assyria. 14. The Bac- trus is a river of the Orient said to be named from King Bactrus, from whom the Bactrians and their city are also named. 15. The Choaspes (i.e. the Karkheh) is a river in Persia, so named in their language because it has amaz- ingly sweet waters, such that the Persian kings claimed the drinking water from it for themselves for the distance that the river runs between Persian riverbanks. Some people think the river Cydnus in Cilicia originates from this river. 16. The river Araxis (i.e. the Araks) in Armenia, which arises from the same mountain as the Euphrates, but from different underground channels, is so named because it destroys everything with its rapacity (rapac- itas, from rapax, "rapacious"). Hence, when Alexander wished to cross it, and a bridge was built, the river rushed
past with such force that it demolished the bridge. This river has its head a short distance from the source of the Euphrates, and then it flows into the Caspian Sea.
17. The Syrian river called the Orontes flows along the walls of Antioch; originating (oriens) from the east (solis ortus), it joins the sea not far from that city. The ancients called it Orontes in Latin from the tracing of its origin. The whole city is cooled almost all the time by the impact of the rather cold current of this river, and by the westerly breezes blowing there constantly. 18. The Jordan is a river in Judea, named from two springs, one of which is called Ior and the other Dan. These rivers, once far apart from each other, are joined into a single channel, which is then called the Jordan. It originates at the foot of Mount Libanus (i.e. Mt. Lebanon), and separates Judea from Arabia; after many twists and turns it flows into the Dead Sea near Jericho. 19. The Eusis flows forth from the mountains of the Caucasus and, along with many others, empties into the Euxine Sea, (i.e. the Black Sea), whence it is named. 20. The Cydnus is a river in Cilicia that comes from Mount Taurus, possessing amazingly sweet waters, and is so called because whatever is white the Syrians call cydnus in their native language. Whence the name is also given to this river because it swells (i.e. runs white) in the summer when the snows melt, but in the other seasons of the year it is calm and quiet. 21. Hylas is a river in Asia. Pactolus is a river in Asia that carries golden sands. Vergil says of it (Aen. 10.142):
And Pactolus waters (fields) with gold.
People give it another name, Chrysorrhoa, because of its golden flow (cf. ypUoóç, "gold"; po?, "stream"). 22. Her- mus is a river in Asia that divides the Smyrnean plains, and its currents are filled with gold and sand; Smyrna is named from it (cf. oµápva, "myrrh," golden in color).
23. The Meander is a twisting river in Asia that, with its course bending back between Caria and Ionia, rushes into the gulf that separates Miletus and Priene. It is called the Meander because it is twisting and never flows in a straight course (perhaps cf. meare, "traverse"). Of it Ovid says (Met. 2. 246)
The Meander amuses itself along its curving waters.
24. Tanus was the first king of the Scythians; the river Tanais (i.e. the Don), which proceeds from the Rhipaean forest and divides Europe from Asia, is said to be named after him. It flows between the two parts of the world and
empties into the Black Sea. 25. The Inachus (i.e. the Ban- itza) is a river in Achaea that waters the Argolic plains. King Inachus, who gave the Argive people their origin, named it after himself. There too is the river Eryman- thus, issuing from Mount Erymanthus. 26. The Padus (i.e. the Po), a river in Italy flowing from the Alpine heights, arises from three sources. The name of one of these sources is Padus, which, having spread out like a lake, sends the river from its lap. The river Padus is named from this. The Greeks also give it the cognomen Eridanus, from Eridanus the son of the Sun, whom peo- ple call Phaeton. After being struck by lightning he fell into this river and died. It is fed by melting snows at the rising of the Dog Star (i.e. in the dog days of summer), and with the addition of thirty other streams it empties into the Adriatic Sea near Ravenna.
27. The Tiber (Tiberis), a river of Italy, is said to be named after Tiberinus, king of the Albans; he died in this river and from his death gave it his name. Before this time it had the ancient name Albula because of its color, since it is white (albus), due to the snows. It is also called the Tibris, which is the same as Tiberis, but Tiberis is used in everyday speech, and Tibris in poetry. 28. The Danube (Danubius) river of Germany is said to be named from the abundance of snow (nix, gen. nivis) by which it is much swelled. This is more famous than all the other rivers of Europe. It is also called the Ister, because, as it wanders through innumerable peoples, it changes its name and gathers more force as it travels. It arises in the mountains of Germania and the western regions belonging to the barbarians. It proceeds toward the east, and receives sixty tributaries. It flows into the Black Sea through seven mouths. 29. The Rhodanus (i.e. the Rhone), a river in Gaul, is named after the city Rhodos, which was founded by colonists from Rhodes. It rushes with a swift current, cutting channels into the Tyrrhe- nian Sea. It creates no small danger for sailors, when the waves of the sea and the currents of the river wrestle together.
30. The Rhenus (i.e. the Rhine) is said to be named from association with the Rhodanus, because it rises from the same province as the Rhodanus. It is a river of Germany counted among the three greatest rivers of Europe. It directs its waters from the Alpine heights to the depths of the Ocean. 31. The Iberus (i.e. the Ebro) is a river that once gave its name to all of Spain. 32. Mineus, a riverof Galicia, took its name from the color of a pigment
that is found abundantly in it (i.e. minium, "cinnabar").
33. The river Durius (the present-day Douro in Spain) is so called by the Greeks, as if the word were 'Doric.' Carthago (i.e. a Carthaginian colony in Spain, present- day Cartagena) has given its name to the Tagus (i.e. the Tajo), a river of Spain that issues from that city. It is rich in gold-bearing sands and for this reason is preem- inent among the Spanish rivers. 34. The river Baetis (i.e. the Guadalquivir) gave its name to the province Baetica (i.e. present-day Andalusia). Martial says of it (Epigrams 12.98.1):
Baetis, wreathe your hair with an olive-bearing crown, you who dye your fleece gold in sparkling waters -
because woolen fleeces were dyed there to a beautiful color. And it is named Baetis because it runs through low ground, for the Greeks say bitin for 'low' or 'sub- merged.' 35. Some rivers, during the Flood, were blocked by loosened masses of earth; whereas other rivers, which did not exist before, burst forth to the surface at that time through the ruptured passages of the abyss.
xxii. Floods (De diluviis) 1. A 'flood' (diluvium) is so named because it destroys (delere) everything it washes over with the scourge of its waters. 2. The first flood occurred at the time of Noah, when the Almighty was offended by the sins of humans. The entire world was covered, everything was destroyed, there was a united expanse of sky and sea. To this day we observe evidence of this in the stones we are accustomed to see on remote mountains, stones that have hardened with shellfish and oysters in them, and often stones that have been hollowed out by the waters. 3. The second flood was in Achaea at the time of the patriarch Jacob and of Ogygus, who was the founder and king of Eleusis, and who gave his name to both the place and the age. 4. The third flood was in Thessaly in the time of Moses and Amphictyon, who was the third to reign after Cecrops. During their lifetimes, an influx of water consumed the greater part of the pop- ulation of Thessaly, although a few survived - those who fled to the mountains, particularly to Mount Parnassus. Deucalion took possession of a kingdom at that time by going around the mountain, rescuing people who
came to him by boat, seeking refuge; he provided them with shelter and sustenance across the twin peaks of Parnassus. The fables of the Greeks say that humankind was recreated from stones by Deucalion, because of the ingrained stoniness of the human heart. 5. But whenever rivers, swollen with unusual rains, overflow to a degree
that is beyond what is normal in duration or magni- tude, and cause widespread destruction, they too are called 'floods.' One must bear in mind, however, that when rivers rise higher than normal, they not only bring destruction in the present moment, but they also signify something yet to happen.
